Digitized by tine Internet Arciiive 

in 2009 witii funding from 

University of Pittsburgii Library System 



Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/americanstatepap_d02unit 



AMERICAN STATE PAPERS. 



CliASS II. 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



voiiUittE n. 



AMERICAN STATE PAPERS. 



DOCUMENTS, 



W'l-LMM Sl IWARV OURLINQTON 

MEMORI.U LIBRARY 
U/»lVEftsirY OF PITTSBURGH 



liEGISIiATIVE AND EXECUTIVE, 



CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES, 



FROM THE FIRST SESSION OF THE FOURTEENTH TO THE SECOND SESSION OF THE 
NINETEENTH CONGRESS, INCLUSIVE: 



COMMENCINGr DECEMBER 4, 1815, AND ENDIiyG 3IARCH 3, 18:27. 



SELECTED AND EDITED, UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF CONGRESS, 

BY WALTER LOWRIE, Secretary of the Senate, 

AND 

WALTER S. FRANKLIN, Clerk of the House of Representatives. 



VOLUME 



WASHINGTON: 

PUBLISHED BY GALES AND SEATON. 
1834. 



/9^ 









TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



II¥DIAl\ AFFAIRS....VOI.. II. 



COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. 

No. P^ge. 

140 Transmitting treaties with twenty-one tribes, December 6, 1815, with the correspondence of the com- 

missioners, --------I 

141 On the subject of the Creek grant to Andrew Jackson and others, January 19, 1816, - - 26 

143 Transmitting a treaty and convention with the Cherokees, March 28, 1816, - - - 88 

144 Transmitting treaties with thirteen Indian tribes, December 10, 1816, - - - 91 
149 Transmitting treaties witii several Indian tribes, December 10, 1817, - - - 127 

152 Transmitting a treaty with the Creeks, March 6. 1818. - - - - 151 

153 Transmitting information respecting the war with tlie Seminoles, March 25, 1818, - - 154 

154 Transmitting a list of the Indian agents, April 10, 1818, - - - - 162 

155 Transmitting treaties with several tribes of Indians, November 30, 1818, ... 164 

160 Transmitting a treaty with the Cherokees, March 2, 1819, - - - - 187 

161 Transmitting treaties with the Kickapoos and Chippewas, January 4, 1820, - - - 194 
164 On the extinguishment of the Indian title to land in Georgia. March 20, 1820, - - 204 

171 Transmitting treaties with several tribes of Indians, December 14, 1820, - ■ i, . " ^^^ 

172 On the receipts and expenditures in the Indian Department, and the contracts made since March, 1811, 

January 5. 1821, - - - - - - - 345 

174 Transmitting a treaty with the Creek Indians, January 26, 1821, - - - - 248 

175 On the claims of the citizens of Georgia against the Creeks, February 10. 1821, - - 254 

176 Transmitting a treatywith the Indian tribes at Chicago, December 24, 1821, - - - 257 
180 On expenditures for the civilization of the Indians, January 22, 1822, - - - 271 
182 On the condition of the several Indian tribes. February 11, 1822, - - - - 275 

184 On the extinguishment of the Indian title to lands in favor of certain States, February 25, 1822, - 323 

185 Provision for treating with the Cherokees, March 1, 1822, - - - - 325 

186 On the civilization of the Indians, March 1, 1822, - - - - - 325 
189 Progress of the Society of the United Brethren in progagating the gospel among the Indians, Decem- 
ber 10, 1822, - - - - - - - - 372 

191 Transmitting treaties with the Osage and Sac and Fox tribesof Indians, January 6, 1823, - - 392 

192 Information relative to the execution of the treaty with the Choctaws of 18th October, 1820, February 

6, 1823, - - - ■■ - - - - 393 

19S Transmitting a treaty with the Florida Indians, December 15. 1823, - - - 429 

204 On the extinguishment of Indian title to land in Georgia, April 2, 1824, - - - 460 

209 Proposition of a part of the Cherokees to cede their land, April 16, 1824, - - - 502 

210 Transmitting a treaty with the Cherokees in 1804, April 30, 1824, - - - 506 
214 Transmitting treaties with the loway. Sac and Fox tribes, December 15, 1824, - - 524 

216 Transmitting a treaty with the Quapaws, January 19, 1825, - - . - 529 

217 On the abolition of Indian trading-houses, January 21, 1825, - - - - 531 
/ 218 Plan for removing the several Indian tribes west of the Mississippi, January 27. 1825, - - 54! 

219 Transmitting a treaty with the Choctaws, and correspondence connected with the negotiation, January 

27, 1825, •■ - - - - - - - 547 

222 Transmitting a treaty with the Creeks at the Indian Spring, February 28, 1825, - - 5G3 

224 Transmitting treaties with the Osage, Kanzas, and Shawanee tribes, December 14, 1825, - 588 

225 Transmitting instructions and correspondence with Generals Pinckney and Jackson, relating to the 

treaty with the Creeks at Fort Jackson, December 27, 1825, . - - - 592 

226 Transmitting treaties with several tribesof Indians. January 11, 1826, - - - 595 

227 Transmitting treaties with the Great and Little Osage and the Kanzas tribes, January 30, 1826, - 610 

228 Transmitting a treaty with the Creeks. January 31. 1826, - - - - 611 
232 On the condition of the Florida Indians, March 1, 1826, - - - - 655 
236 Transmitting a supplemental article to the treaty with the Creeks, March 31, 1826, - - 662 
238 Transmitting a treaty with the Creeks, April 26, 1826, - - - - 664 

242 Respecting grants made by the Indians to agents or commissioners of the United States, December 8, 

1826, - - - - - - - - 676 

243 Transmitting treaties with the Chippewas, Pattawatamies, and Miamies, December 12, 1826, - 677 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY. 

168 On the expenditures for the Indian Department since the declaration of independence, December 7, 

1820, -.----.- 209 

COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE SECRETARY OF WAR. 

142 On the trade and intercourse with the Indians, March 14. 1816. - - - -- 26 
146 Respecting the exchange of lands with the Indian tribes, January 17, 1817, - - - 124 
157 On the alteration of the system for trading with the Indians, December 8, 1818, - - 181 
159 Respecting the adjustment of the claim of the friendly Creeks, January 18, 1819. - - 186 

162 On the subject of the progress made in the civilization of the Indians, January 17, 1820. - - 200 
167 Showing the transactions at the Indian trading-houses since the peace in 1815, April 13, 1820, - 207 

169 A statement of Indian annuities payable by the United States, December 7, 1820. - - 217 



viii TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

No. Page. 
173 A statement exhibiting the quantity of merchandise at the tradin§-houses, and in the hands of the 

superintendent, January 13, 1821. ...... 247 

179 On the expenditures for the Indian Department for 1820 and 1821, January 16, 1822, . . 266 

183 Accounts of the superintendents of Indian aft'airs in Michigan and Missouri. February II, 1822, - 284 

188 Names and pay of all persons employed in the Indian Department. April 12, 1822, - - 364 

194 Information relating to the accounts of superintendents and agents for Indian affairs, February 19, 1823, 398 

199 A statement of expenditures for the civilization of the Indians, January 26, 1824, - - 443 

200 Disbursements in the Indian Department, February 21, 1824, ... - 443 
.202 A proposition to hold treaties with the tribes beyond the Mississippi for preserving the fur trade, March 

18. 1824, - - - - - - - - 448 

213 On the expenditures of the Indian Department, December 7. 1824, - - . 522 
215 Plan for extinguishing the Cherokee claim to land in Georgia, Tennessee, and Alabama, January 12, 

1825, - - - - - - - ■• 526 

221 On disbursements by Indian agents, February 25, 1825. .... 559 

229 On the subject of the treaty with the Florida Indians. February 6, 1826, - - .614 

231 On the preservation and civilization of the Indians, February 21, 1826. - - - 646 

233 Description of the Indians residing on the Missouri river, March 6, 1826, - . - 655 

237 Respecting the location of the Florida Indians, April 18, 1826, - - - - 663 

244 Correspondence in relation to the Florida Indians. December 18, 1826, ... ggs 

245 Respecting the emigration of the Indians west of the Mississippi, January 3, 1827, - - 699 

246 On encroachments of the whites on the lands of the Choctaws in Arkansas, January 8, 1827, - 702 

247 On the condition of the Quapaw Indians, January 10, 1827, .... 704 

248 Respecting the refusal of the Chickasaws and Choctaws to cede land in Mississippi, January 15, 1827, 708 

COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT OF INDIAN AFFAIRS. 

170 On the trade and intercourse with the Indians, December 13, 1820, - . - 22! 

178 On the trade and intercourse with the Indians, January 14, 1822. - . . . 260 

187 Examination into the operation of the factory system, March 8. 1822, ... 335 

197 A statement of the expenditures of the Indian Department, December 2, 1823, - - 428 
223 On the expenditures of the Indian Department, and the state of our relations with the several tribes, 

December 6, 1825, - - . - - - - 581 
241 On the expenditures of the Indian Department, and the state of our relations with the several tribes, 

December 5, 1826, - - - . - - .671 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES. 

145 In favor of an exchange of territory with the Indians, January 9, 1817, ... 123 

147 In favor of satisfying the claim of the friendly Creeks, January 29, 1817, ... ]26 

148 On the trade and intercourse with the Indians, February 4, 1817, - . . . 127 

150 Amendments proposed to the treaty with the W'yandots, Senecas, Delawares, Shavvaaees, Pattawata- 

mies, Ottawas, and Chippewas, December 29, 1817, - . . . 148 

151 In favor of the trade, intercourse, and schools among the Indians, January 22, 1818, - . 150 
156 Prohibiting the emigration of the Choctaws, December 1, 1818. .... igo 
158 In favor of the alteration of the system for trading with the Indians, January 15, 1819, - . 185 
163 On the trade and intercourse with the Indians, February 16, 1820, ... 201 

165 On the trade and intercourse with the Indians, April 5, 1820. - - - - 205 

166 In favor of the claim of the Stockbridge Indians, April 13, 1820, - - . . 206 
177 On the extinguishment of the Indian title to land in Georgia, January 7, 1822, - - 259 
190 In favor of the extinguishment of the Indian title to land in Georgia, January 6, 1823, - . 391 
193 On the extinguishment of Indian title to land in favor of certain States, February 13, 1823, - 397 

195 Respecting the Florida Indians, February 21. 1823, ..... 408 

196 On the abolition of the Indian trading-houses, March 1, 1823, .... 417 
203 In favor of the provision made for the civilization of the Indians, March 23. 1824, - - 457 

205 On the subject of the extinguishment of Indian title to land in Georgia, April 5, 1824, - - 490 

206 Adverse to the claims of the friendly Creeks, April 15, 1824, .... 491 

207 In favor of the extinguishment of the Indian title to lands in Georgia. April 15, 1824, - - 495 

211 In favor of the proposition to extinguish the Indian title to lands in Missouri, May 14, 1824, - 512 

212 On the abolition of the Indian trading-houses. May 25, 1824, .... 513 

234 In favor of the regulation of the fur trade, March 8, 1826. - . - - 657 

235 Adverse to the ratitication of the treaty of 1826 with the Creeks, March 17, 1826, - - 662 

239 Provision for carrying into effect the treaty with the Creeks, May 17, 1826, ... 665 

240 On the condition of the Indians, May 20, 1826, , - . - - - 667 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

181 Memorial relative to the civilization of the Indians, January 28, 1822, ... 274 
201 Application of the Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions for pecuniary aid in civitizing the 

Indians, March 3, 1824, --.--.. 446 

208 Views of the Cherokees in relation to further cessions of their land, April 16, 1824, - - 502 
220 Application of the Choctaw tribe for aid in improving their condition, February 21, 1825, ■. - 558 
230 Claim of the State of Alabama under the treaty with the Creeks at the Indian Spring, Februajy 7. 1826, 014 
•249 Proceedings of the Legislature of Georgia in relation to the treaty made with the Creeks at Indian 

Spring, January 23, 1827, ....... 727 



AMERICAN STATE PAPERS. 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



14th Congress.] No. 140. [1st Session. 

TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 

COMMUNICATED TO THE SENATE, DECEMBER 6, 1815. 

To the Senate of the United States: Washington, December 6, 1815. 

I lay before the Senate, for their consideration and advice as to a ratification, treaties which have been 
concluded with the following Indian tribes, viz: loway, Kickapoo, Pattawatamie, Sioux of the Lakes, Pianke- 
shaw, Sioux of the river St. Peter's, Great and Little Osage tribes, Yancton, Mahas, Fox, Teeton, Sacnation, 
Kansas tribe, Chippewa, Ottawa, Pattawatamie, Shawanee, Wyandot, Miami, Delaware, Seneca. 

I communicate also the letters from the commissioners on the part of the United States relating to their pro- 
ceedings on those occasions. 

JAMES MADISON. 



lOWAY TRIBE. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded hetween William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Augiiste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned king, chiefs, and warriors of the loway tribe or natio7i, on the 
part and behalf of the said tribe or nation, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribe 
or nation, and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before 
the war, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility by one or either of the contracting parties against the other shall 
be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States and all 
the individuals composing the said loway tribe or nation. 

Art. 3. The contracting parties do hereby agree, promise, and oblige themselves, reciprocally, to deliver up 
all the prisoners now in their hands (by what means soever the same may have come into their possession) to the 
officer commanding at St. Louis, to be by him restored to their respective nations as soon as it may be prac- 
ticable. 

Art. 4. The contracting parties, in the sincerity of mutual friendship, recognise, re-establish, and confirm all 
and every treaty, contract, and agreement heretofore concluded between the United States and the said loway 
tribe or nation. 

In witness whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the aforesaid king, chiefs, and warriors, have hereunto subscribed their names and af- 
fixed their seals this sixteenth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred 
and fifteen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 
1 E 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 140. 



KICKAPOO TRIBE. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs, warriors, and deputies of the Kickapoo tribe or nation, on 
the part and behalf of the said tribe or nation, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United Stales and the said tribe 
or nation, and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before 
the war, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility by one or either of the contracting parties towards the other shall 
be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States of Ame- 
rica and all the individuals composing the said Kickapoo tribe or nation. 

Art. 3. The contracting parties do hereby agree, promise, and oblige themselves, reciprocally, to deliver up 
all the prisoners now in their hands (by what means soever the same ma}' have come into their possession) to the 
officer commanding at Fort Clarke, on the Illinois river, to be by him restored to their respective nations as soon as 
it may be practicable. 

Art. 4. The contracting parties, in the sincerity of mutual friendship, recognise, re-establish, and confirm all 
and every treaty, contract, and agreement heretofore concluded between the United States and the Kickapoo tribe 
or nation. 

In witness whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the chiefs, warriors, and deputies of the said tribe, have hereunto subscribed their names 
and affixed their seals this second day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hun- 
dred and fifteen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



PATTAWATAMIE TRIBE. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded betioeen William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors of the Pattawatamie tribe or nation residing 
on the river Illinois, on the part and behalf of the said tribe or nation, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribe 
or nation, and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before 
the war, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility by one or either of the contracting parties against the other shall 
be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States of America 
and all the individuals composing the said Pattawatamie tribe or nation. 

Art. 3. The contracting parties hereby agree, promise, and bind themselves, reciprocally, to deliver up all the 
prisoners now in their hands (by what means soever the same may have come into their possession) to the officer 
commanding at Fort Clarke, on the Illinois river, as soon as it may be practicable. 

Art. 4. The contracting parties, in the sincerity of mutual friendship, recognise, re-establish, and confirm all 
and every treaty, contract, and agreement heretofore concluded between the United States and the Pattawatamie 
tribe or nation. 

In witness of all and every thing herein determined between the United States of America and the said 
Pattawatamie tribe or nation residing on the river Illinois, we, their underwritten commissioners and 
chiefs aforesaid, by virtue of our full powers, have signed this definitive treaty, and have caused our 
seals to be hereunto affixed. 
Done at Portage des Sioux, this eighteenth day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hun- 
dred and fifteen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



SIOUX OF THE LAKES. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edioards, and Auguste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors of the Sioux of the Lakes, on the part and 
behalf of their tribe, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribe> 
and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before the late 
war between the United States and Great Britain, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility committed by one or either of the contracting parties against the 
other shall be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States of America 
and all the individuals composing the said tribe of the Lakes, and all the friendly relations that existed between them 
before the war shall be, and the same are hereby, renewed. 

Art. 3. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves and their said tribe, do hereby acknowledge them- 
selves and their aforesaid tribe to be under the protection of the United States, and of no other nation, power, or 
sovereign whatsoever. 

In witness whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners afore- 
said, and the chiefs and warriors of the aforesaid tribe, have hereunto subscribed their names and affixed 
their seals this nineteenth day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifteen, 
and of tlie independence of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



1815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 3 

PIANKESHAW. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors of the Piankeshaw tribe or nation, on the 
part and behalf of the said tribe or nation, of the other part. 

The parties being anxious of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribe 
or nation, and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before 
the war, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility by one or either of the contracting parties against the other shall 
be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States of America 
and all the individuals composing the Piankeshaw tribe or nation. 

Art. 3. The contracting parties, in the sincerity of mutual friendship, recognise, re-establish, and confirm all 
and every treaty, contract, or agreement heretofore concluded between the United States and the said Piankeshaw 
tribe or nation. 

In witness of all and every thing herein determined between the United States of America and the said 
Piankeshaw tribe or nation, we, their underwritten commissioners and chiefs aforesaid, by virtue of our 
full powers, have signed this definitive treaty, and have caused our seals to be hereunto affixed. 
Done at Portage des Siou.x, this eighteenth day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hun- 
dred and fifteen, and of the independence of the United States of America the fortieth. 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



SIOUX OF THE RIVER ST. PETER'S. 

A treaty nj peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 

Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 

States, of the one part, and the chiefs and toarriors of the Sioux of the river St. Peter's, on the part and 

behalf of their said tribe, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribe, 
and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before the late 
war between the United States and Great Britain, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility committed by one or either of the contracting parties against the 
other shall be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States of America 
and all the individuals composing the tribe of Sioux of the river St. Peter's, and all the friendly relations that 
existed between them before the war shall be, and the same are hereby, renewed. 

Art. 3. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves and their said tribe, do hereby acknowledge them- 
selves and their tribe to be under the protection of the United States, and of no other power, nation, or sovereign 
whatsoever. 

In testimony whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the chiefs and warriors of the aforesaid tribe, have hereunto subscribed their names and 
affixed their seals this nineteenth day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fif- 
teen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



GREAT AND LITTLE OSAGE TRIBES. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned king, chiefs, and warriors of the Great and Little Osage tribes 
or nations, on the part and behalf of their said tribes or nations, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribes 
or nations, and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before 
the war, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility by one or either of the contracting parties against the other shall be 
mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States of America 
and all the individuals composing the said Osage tribes or nations. 

Art. 3. The contracting parties, in the sincerity of nmtual friendship, recognise, re-establish, and confirm all' 
and every treaty, contract, and agreement heretofore concluded between the United States and the said Osage tribes 
or nations. 

In witness whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the king, chiefs, and warriors of the said tribes or nations, have hereunto subscribed their 
names and affixed their seals this twelfth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight 
hundred and fifteen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 140. 



YANCTON TRIBE. 

A treat}/ of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors of the Yancton ti'ibe of Indians, on the part 
and behalf of their said tribe, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribe, 
and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before the late 
war between the United States and Great Britain, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility committed by one or either of the contracting parties against the other 
shall be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States of America 
and all the individuals composing the said Yancton tribe, and all the friendly relations that existed between them 
before the war shall be, and the same are hereby, renewed. 

Art. 3. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves and their said tribe, do hereby acknowledge them- 
selves to be under the protection of the United States of America, and of no other nation, power, or sovereign 
whatsoever. 

In witness whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the chiefs aforesaid, have hereunto subscribed their names and affixed their seals this 
nineteenth day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifteen, and of the 
independence of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



MAHAS TRIBE. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors of the Mahas, on the part and behalf of 
the said tribe or nation, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribe 
or nation, and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before the 
late war between the United States and Great Britain, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility committed by one or either of the contracting parties against the other 
shall be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States of America 
and all the individuals composing the tribe or nation of the Mahas, and all the friendly relations that existed between 
them before the war shall be, and the same are hereby, renewed. 

Art. 3. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves and their said tribe or nation, do herebj' acknow- 
ledge themselves and their tribe or nation' to be under the protection of the United States, and of no other nation, 
power, or sovereign whatsoever. 

In witness whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the chiefs and warriors of the aforesaid tribe or nation, have hereunto subscribed their 
names and affixed their seals this twentieth day of July, in the j'ear of our Lord one thousand eight 
hundred and fifteen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.} 



FOX TRIBE. 



A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned king, chiefs, and warriors of the Fox tribe or nation, on the part 
and behalf of the said tribe or nation, of the other part. 
The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribe 

or nation, and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before 

the war, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility by one or either of the contracting parties against the other shall 
be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between the citizens of the United States of America 
and all the individuals composing the said Fox tribe or nation. 

Art. 3. The contracting parties do hereby agree, promise, and oblige themselves, reciprocally, to deliver up all 
the prisoners now in their hands (by what means soever the same may have come into their possession) to the offi- 
cer commanding at Fort Clarke, on the Illinois river, to be by him restored to their respective nations as soon as 
it may be practicable. 

Art. 4. The said Fox tribe or nation do hereby assent to, recognise, re-establish, and confirm the treaty of St. 
Louis, which was concluded on the third day of November, one thousand eight hundred and four, to the full extent 
of their interest in the same, as well as all other contracts and agreements between the parties; and the United States 
promise to fulfil all the stipulations contained in the said treaty in favor of the said Fox tribe or nation. 

In witness whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the aforesaid king, chiefs, and warriors of the Fox tribe or nation aforesaid, have hereunto 
subscribed their names and affixed their seals this fourteenth day of September, in the year of our Lord 
one thousand eight hundred and fifteen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of '. 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



1815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 5 

TEETON TRIBE. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Augustc 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors of the Teeton tribe of Indians, on the part 
and behalf of their said tribe, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establisliing peace and friendship between the United Slates and the said tribe, 
and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before the lal<! 
war between the United States and Great Britain, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility committed by one or either of the contracting parties against the 
other shall be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United .States of America 
and all the individuals composing the said Teeton tribe, and the friendly relations that existed between them before 
the war shall be, and the same are hereby, renewed. 

Art. 3. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves and their said tribe, do hereby acknowledge them- 
selves and their aforesaid tribe to be under the protection of the United Slates of America, and of no other nation, 
power, or sovereign whatsoever. 

In witness whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the chiefs and vifarriors of the said tribe, have hereunto subscribed their names and affixed 
their seals this nineteenth day of July, one thousand eight hundred and fifteen, and of the independence 
of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



SAC NATION. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Augustc 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and ivarriors of that portion of the Sac nation of Indians 
now residing on the Missouri river, of the other part. 

Whereas the undersigned chiefs and warriors, as well as that portion of the nation which they represent, have 
at all times been desirous of fulfilling the,ir treaty with the United Slates with perfect good faith, and for that pur- 
pose found themselves compelled, since the commencement of the late war, to separate themselves from the rest of 
their nation, and remove to the Missouri river, where they have continued to give proofs of their friendship and 
fidelity: and whereas the United States, justly appreciating the conduct of said Indians, are disposed to do them 
the most ample justice that is practicable, the said parties haye agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves and that portion of the Sacs which they repre- 
sent, do hereby assent to the treaty between tlie United States of America and the united tribes of Sacs and Foxes, 
which was concluded at St. Louis on the third day of November, one thousand eight hundred and four; and they 
moreover promise to do all in their power to re-establish and enforce the same. 

Art. 2. The said chiefs and warriors, for themselves and those they represent, do further promise to remain 
distinct and separate from the Sacs of Rock river, giving them no aid or assistance whatever until peace shall also 
be concluded between the United States and the said Sacs of Rock river. 

Art. 3. The United States on their part promise to allow the said Sacs of the Missouri river all the rights and 
privileges secured to them by the treaty of St. Louis before mentioned; and also as soon as practicable to furnish 
them with a just proportion of the annuities stipulated to be paid by that treaty, provided they shall continue to 
comply with this and their former treaty. 

In witness whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the aforesaid chiefs and warriors, have hereunto subscribed their names and affixed their 
seals this thirteenth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifteen, 
and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

Done at Portage des Sioux, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



KANZAS TRIBE. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between Ninian Edwards and Auguste Chouteau, commis- 
sioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said States, of the one 
part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors of the Kanzas tribe of Indians, on the part and behalf of their 
said tribe, of the other part. 

The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and their said 
tribe, and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before 
the late war between the United States and Great Britain, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility by one or either of the contracting parties against the other sliall 
be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States of Ame- 
rica and all the individuals composing the said Kanzas tribe, and all the friendly relations that existed between 
them before the war shall be, and the same are hereby, renewed. 

Art. 3. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves and their said tribe, do hereby acknowledge 
themselves to be under the protection of the United States of America, and of no other nation, power, or sovereign 
whatsoever. 

In witness whereof, the said Ninian Edwards and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as aforesaid, and the 
chiefs aforesaid, have hereunto subscribed their names and affixed their seals this twenty-eighth day of 
October, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifteen, and of the independence of 
the United States the fortieth. 

Done at St. Louis, in the presence of . 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 140. 



Gentlemen: War Department, March 11, 1815. 

I had the honor to transmit to you on the 24th ultimo a copy of the treaty of peace which was concluded 
on the 24th of December last between the United States and Great Britain at Ghent, and ratified by the President, 
with the advice and consent of the Senate, on the 17th ultimo. By the ninth article of this treaty it is stipulated 
that the United States shall put an end to all hostilities with the Indian tribes with whom they might be at war at 
the lime of the ratification, and to restore to such tribes all the rights and privileges to which they were entitled 
previous to the war: provided that such tribes or tiations should agree to desist from all hostilities against the United 
States of America, their citizens and subjects, upon the ratification of such treaty being notified to such tribes or 
nations, and should so desist accordingly. By the same article it is also stipulated that His Britannic Majesty 
should likewise put an end, in like manner and on the same conditions, to hostilities with the tribes or nations of 
Indians with whom he might be at war at the time of the ratification of said treaty. 

It is incumbent on the United States to execute every article of this treaty with perfect good faith, and it is 
their firm resolution to do it. They wish to be particularly exact in the execution of the article above recited 
relating to the Indian tribes. For this purpose the President has, in consequence, appointed you commissioners 
with full power to conclude a treaty with all those tribes, for which I enclose you a commission. 

You will give immediate notice to all the tribes with whom the United States are at war on the Mississippi and 
its waters of the peace which has been concluded between the United States and Greal Britain, and of the stipula- 
tions contained in it in regard to them; and you will likewise invite them to attend by a deputation of chiefs, at 
such place or places as you may appoint, for the purpose of concluding the proposed treaty of peace and amity 
between the United States and all those tribes. It is thought proper to confine this treaty to the sole object of 
peace. Other arrangements between the United States and the Indian tribes adapted to their mutual interests 
may be entered into hereafter. 

You will avail yourself of the opportunity to inform the Indian tribes that it is intended to establish strong posts 
very high up the Mississippi, and from the Mississippi to Lake Michigan, and to open trading-houses at those posts, 
or other suitable places for their accommodation. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

J. MONROE. 

Gov. Clark, Gov. Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, Esq. 



Gentlemen: War Department, March 11, 1815. 

Colonel McNair has recommended Mr. Robert Wash as a gentleman well qualified to act as your secretary, 
and it is requested that he may be appointed as such. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

J. MONROE. 
Messrs. Clark, Edwards, and Colonel Chouteau. 



Sir: Department op War, March 11, 1815. 

The commission for the commissioners to treat with the Indians with whom we were at war at the time the 
treaty with Great Britain was ratified, and instructions, are committed to Colonel McNair, who will likewise have the 
pleasure to deliver you this letter. Of this gentleman a very favorable opinion is entertained by the President, and 
had he not recommended and insisted on the appointment of Mr. Chouteau as third commissioner, he would 
have been appointed himself, as I have reason to believe. It had previously been determined to give him a re- 
spectable command, had the war continued, in the troops which were intended to have been raised in the western 
country. I mention these circumstances to show you the good opinion which is formed of him by the Government. 
Should any opportunity occur to enable the commissioners to avail themselves of his services with advantage in the 
proposed treaty with the Indians, it is desired you should do it; or should you find, hereafter, that he may be em- 
ployed either with the Indians or in any other way in the Missouri Territory, or high up the Mississippi, I wish you 
to communicate it to the Government, and it will be considered. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 
His Excellency William Clark. J. MONROE. 



Sir: Department op War, March 13, 1815. 

Mr. Boilvin has been continued in the Indian agency which he has heretofore held. He will take his in- 
structions from you, and will no doubt be useful in giving notice to the Indian tribes and nations, and inducing their 
chiefs to attend at the treaty which you are authorized to make with them. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 
His Excellency William Clark. J. MONROE. 



Sir: Department of War, March 25, 1815. 

At the treaty which you as one of the commissioners are authorized to hold with the Indians, the President 
thinks it will be proper to make some presents to the chiefs and headmen of the several tribes who may attend. 
For this purpose, twenty thousand dollars worth of goods have been directed to be purchased, and will be forwarded 
by Messrs. Johnson & Sibley, who will probably reach St. Louis with them in the first week in June. Whether 
it will be necessary to distribute the whole of these goods to the Indians, will depend upon the number of tribes 
which attend the treaty, and on the judgment and discretion of the commissioners as to the extent to which presents 
ought to be made. Should any Indians who have been friendly to the United States attend the treaty, it will be 
well, in the distribution of the presents, to let them feel that those who have been our enemies are not better treated 
than those who have been our friends. Among the articles to be sent out there will be some solid silver medals; 
and it having been understood that the late General Pike, when on his expedition up the Mississippi, took from 
some of the Indians medals which had been given to them by the British, it is requested that, if any of these Indians 
attend the treaty, a medal of the largest size be given to each of them in lieu of those taken from them by General 
Pike. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

J. MONROE. 
His Excellency W. Clark, St. Louis. 



1815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY -ONE TRIBES. 7 

Sir: Department of War, March 27, 1815. 

You will please to procure and forward to Governor Clark, of the Missouri Territory, about $20,000 worth 
of goods, intended as presents at the treaty to be held with the Indians who reside on the waters of the Mississippi, 
and who have been at war with the United States. The goods will consist of blankets, strouds, cloths, calicoes, 
handkerchiefs, cotton stuffs, ribands, gartering, frock coats, flags, silver ornaments, paints, wampum, looking- 
glasses, knives, fire-steels, rifles, fusils, flints, powder, tobacco, pipes, needles, &lc. These articles should be 
equal in quality to those which the Indians have been accustomed to receive from the British agents. 

I am, very respectfully, 

JAMES MONROE. 
Gen. John Mason, Superintendent of Indian Trade, Georgetown. 



Sir: St. Louis, Missouri Territory, May 15, 1815. 

We have the honor to state to you that, as commissioners appointed by the President to treat with the 
Indians on the Mississippi river and its waters, we propose to hold the treaty at Portage des Sioux, (a few miles 
above the confluence of the Missouri and Mississippi rivers,) in the early part of July next; and presuming that 
there will be a large assemblage of Indians, a guard calculated to command sufficient respect and to maintain 
order seems to us so necessary, that we beg leave to solicit such orders for those purposes as you may deem it 
expedient to give to the officer having command on this frontier. 

We have the honor, &c. 

WILLIAM CLARK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 
Hon. the Secretary OP War. AUG. CHOUTEAU. 



Sir: St. Louis, May 22, 1815. 

Various indications of the continuance of a hostile disposition on the part of the Sacs and Foxes of Rock 
river towards our Government and the citizens thereof, with some recent aggressions which they are with good 
reason supposed to have committed since they were fully notified of the ratification of the late treaty with Great 
Britain, and its stipulations in regard to them, induce us to consider a permanent peace with those tribes so doubt- 
ful that we feel it our duty most respectfully to suggest it as our opinion that it is highly expedient to be prepared 
for the alternative of war with them. 

In the mean time every effort in our power will be employed to effect a pacification in conformity to our in- 
structions; for which purpose every necessary preparatory measure has been adopted. 

We have the honor, &c. 

WILLIAM CLARK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 
Hon. the Secretary of War, Washington. AUG. CHOUTEAU. 



Sir: St. Louis, May 22, 1815. 

Since writing the letter which we had the honor this day to address to you, we have received additional 
evidence of the determined hostility of the Sacs and others, of Rock river, in the murder of a family in the 
county of St. Charles on the day before yesterday. 

The conduct of those savages, in the cold indifference with which they received several communications in 
regard to the late treaty; their insolent deportment on those occasions; their perfidy in decoying on shore and 
murdering one of the messengers of peace; the murders and depredations which they have repeated since they 
were notified of the treaty, together with the suggestions and admonitions of the British officers themselves to be 
on our guard against them, leave no doubt on our minds that it is the intention of those tribes to continue the war, 
and that nothing less than a vigorous display of military force can change their disposition. 

Seeing that they have not agreed, on the notification of the ratification of the treaty, to desist from hostilities, 
and that they have not desisted, we feel very much at a loss to decide on the course proper to be pursued by us 
in relation to them. 

To treat with ihem (even if they should not eventually decline our overture) without requiring the surrender 
of the authors of the recent hostilities, or some other retributions, would, we fear, be of dangerous consequences in 
its influence on other tribes. But upon this subject we shall be very thankful for the instructions of the President, 
which we will endeavor faithfully to fulfil. 

We have the honor, &c. 

WILLIAM CLARK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 

Hon. the Secretary of War, Washington City. AUG. CHOUTEAU. 



Sir: St. Louis, May 27, 1815. 

I received, yesterday, your letter of the 13th of March last, enclosing me a commission of commissioner to 
conclude, conjointly with their excellencies Governors William Clark and Ninian Edwards, a treaty of peace with 
the different tribes of Indians of the Mississippi and its waters. I had already received the instructions you sent 
me by Col. McNair, and, consequently, acted accordingly, as you may know by the different letters w§ had the 
honor to write you. 

I have accepted willingly this appointment; the more so, as I expect that ray zeal to perform my duty will 
equal the confidence you have been pleased to bestow upon, 

Sir, your most obedient servant, 

AUG. CHOUTEAU. 
The Hon. James Monroe, Secretary of War. 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 140. 



Gentlemen: Department op War, June 11, 1815. 

I have received and laid before the President your communication dated the 15th ultimo. 

The President regrets the hostile dispositions of the Indians; but having executed, in perfect good faith, the 
stipulations of the treaty of Ghent, he will exert the military powers of the Government to secure the peace and 
safety o( the country. 

It is presumed that Colonel Miller, with his detachment, arrived at St. Louis soon after the date of your letters, 
and the enclosed copy of a letter to General Jackson will show the general matters in operation to resist and punish 
the further aggressions of the Indians on the waters of the Mississippi. Colonel Miller will also be authorized to 
continue the rangers in service, and to obtain an immediate reinforcement of militia, if the exigencies should be such 
as to preclude an application to this Department or to Major General Jackson. 

The President has been induced, by the representations from the northwest, to appoint Governor Harrison, 
General McArtliur, and Mr. Graham, commissioners to treat with the Indian tribes in that quarter. As the prin- 
ciples contained in the instructions to those commissioners may be usefully applied in the execution of your trust, 
I am authorized to communicate, confidentially, the enclosed copy for your information and government. 
I am, very respectfully, &c. 

A. J. DALLAS. 

Governor Clark, of the Missouri Territory, 

Governor Edwards, of the Illinois Territory, and 

Mr. CHOnTEAU, 

Commissioners appointed to negotiate a treaty tcith certain Indian tribes. 



Sir: Department of War, June 14, 1815. 

The representations which have been made to the President relative to the dispositions of the Indians in 
various quarters induce him to apprize your excellency of the measures that have been taken since the ratification 
of the treaty of Ghent to restore peace with the Indian tribes, and to conciliate the good-will of the misinformed or 
the discontented. As this object will be easiest effected by communicating to you the instructions given to the com- 
missioners for treating with the Northwest Indians, I have the honor to transmit (in confidence) the enclosed copy. 

If the hostility of the Indians on the waters of the Mississippi should continue, or if in any other quarter danger 
should be apprehended, the officer commanding the troops of the United States may require the aid of the militia 
to resist and repel aggression. Under such circumstances, there may not be time to apply to this Department, and 
the officer is authorized to address himself, at once, to the Governors of the States or Territories from which as- 
sistance can be drawn with the greatest promptitude and facility. Should an application be made to your excel- 
lency, the President relies upon the benefit of your effective co-operation and good offices. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

A. J. DALLAS. 

The Governors of Tennessee, Kentucky, Georgia, Indiana Territory, and Mississippi Territory. 



Sir: Missouri Territory, Portage des Sioux, July 16, 1815. 

We have the honor to inform you that we met at this place, according to appointment, on the 6th instant, 
and have been constantly engaged in endeavoring to discharge the trust confided to us. We are very sorry, however, 
to be obliged to state that the prospects of restoring tranquillity and safety to this frontier, by an amicable accom- 
modation with the Indians, are not at all flattering. 

With the Pattawatamies of Illinois river, and the small band of Piankeshaws who are prisoners of war, we shall 
probably conclude a treaty in a day or two. 

But neither the Winnebagoes, Sacs, Foxes, loways, Kickapoos, or any others residing upon Rock river, have 
sent forward competent deputations of chiefs to treat with us. The Sacs and Foxes, in particular, have committed 
many flagitious acts of hostility since they were notified of the late treaty with Great Britain and the overtures of 
our Government to themselves. 

Some of the most insignificant and contemptible wretches of these tribes, with one chief only, met us at this 
place. They acknowledged that they had no power to treat with us; and the chief that did attend is understood to 
have declared that, even if a treaty should be concluded with all the chiefs, those tribes would never consent to 
relinquish the lands which they have heretofore ceded to us. By their own confessions, some of their war parties 
have very recently made incursions into our frontier, from which a number of horses have been stolen within a few 
days; and even since the treaty commenced, they have waylaid and attacked some of the citizens of this Territory. 

All these considerations induce us to think it very doubtful whether any treaty, upon tbe terms we are authorized 
to offer, can be effected with them. And as the lands they have heretofore ceded extend from the mouth of the 
Illinois river to the mouth of the Ouisconsin, and include the favorite residence of a great number of the hostile 
Indians, we do not believe that they would permit the military lands included within those boundaries to be sur- 
veyed, if they should eventually, for mere temporary purposes, be induced to conclude a treaty with us. 

We are happy to state that the dispositions manifested by the Missouri Indians, generally, seem to be friendly, 
and some of them are anxious to unite with us in the war against the Sacs and Foxes. 

We have the honor to transmit, herewith, the copy of a letter which we felt it our duty to address to the com- 
manding officer in this district. 

We have the honor to be, very respectfully, your obedient servants, 

WILLIAM CLARK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 

To the Hon. Secretary op War. AUGTE. CHOUTEAU. 



Sir: Portage des Sioux, July 11, 1815. 

As commissioners appointed to negotiate a treaty of peace with the tribes of Indians residing upon the Mis- 
sissippi and its waters, who, at the time of the ratification of the treaty with Great Britain, were at war with the 
United States, we, in conformity to our instructions, notified those tribes of the peace that had been concluded, 
and of the stipulations it contained in regard to themselves, and at the same time invited them to attend, by a 
deputation of chiefs, at this place, on the 6th instant, for thie purpose of concluding a treaty of peace and amity 
between the United States and themselves. 



1815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 



The friendly overtures of the Government, however, do not appear to have been met by a correspondent dis- 
position on the part of those tribes. 

None of them have as yet sent forward sufficient deputations to treat with us; several of them liave not sent a 
single man, nor have we any ground to expect they will do so; and while a considerable number of the most insig- 
nificant and contemptible persons of the Sacs and Foxes of Rock river have attended, without more than one chief, 
we have been informed, and have reason to believe, that their principal chiefs and warriors continue to cherish the 
most inveterate and deadly hostility towards the American people and Government, and that war parties from those 
tribes recently started for our frontier; which statement is rendered the more probable by the occurrence of some 
very late acts of hostility (of which they had previously committed many) since they were informed of the peace. 

The Kickapoos sent one chief only, and there are strong grounds to believe that they have identified themselves 
with the Sacs and Foxes in their late hostilities, and that they participate their present unfriendly disposition. 

Those three tribes left here privately last night, and we feel it our duty to state to you as our opinion, that the 
exertion of the military power of the Government will be necessary to secure the peace and safety of this country. 



Sir: Portage des Sioux, July 22, 1815. 

We have the honor to inform you that we have succeeded in concluding separate treaties of peace and 
friendship with the following tribes of Indians, viz: the Pattawatamies of Illinois river, the Piankeshaws, Yanctons, 
Teetons, Mahas, Sioux of the Lakes, (residing between Prairie du Chien and the river St. Petbr's,) and the Sioux 
of the river St. Peter's. 

We feel peculiar pleasure in acknowledging the prompt and useful assistance and co-operation afibrded us in 
the discharge of our duties by Colonel Miller, whose whole conduct, as far as it has come under our observation, 
fully evinces that he merits all that honorable distinction which the Government of his country has bestowed upon him. 
From various indications of the settled hostility of the Sacs and Foxes, Kickapoos, Winnebagoes, &c. of the Rock 
river, and particularly from some additional depredations which some of <4ieni have committed since the date of our 
last letter, we fear there is little ground to hope that a conflict with them can be avoided with either honor to the 
Government or safety to this country. 

We have the honor to be, very respectfully, sir, your most obedient servants, 

WILLIAM CLARK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 
To the Hon. Secretary of War. AUG. CHOUTEAU. 



Sir: St. Louis, September 18, 1815. 

We have the honor to inform you that, since our last communications, we have concluded treaties of peace 
with the Kickapoos, Big and Little Osages, Sacs of the Missouri river. Foxes, and loways. 

A considerable backwardness, if not positive reluctance, on the part of several tribes, in accepting the overtures 
of peace which we were authorized to offer them, has been very manifest. 

The Sacs of Rock river have ultimately refused to treat with us in the most positive manner; speak, without 
disguise, of their opposition to military establishments on the Mississippi river; and have continued to commit occa- 
sional but serious depredations on this frontier. 

By information recently received from Mr. Boilvin, agent at Prairie du Chien, the Indians about that place 
appear to be in considerable commotion, and are much divided among themselves with regard to peace with the 
United Slates. 

A number of British traders, with goods to a great amount, on which they have paid no duties, have arrived on 
the Mississippi, and we feel well assured that many of the difficulties that have occurred with the Indians, and which 
still continue, are justly attributable to that class of people. 

Lieutenant Kennerly, who was sent out for some of the more distant tribes of Indians, not having returned, and 
there yet being some prospect of other tribes coming in, we have adjourned to this place, and hope to finish our 
business in a few days, when we shall forward the report of our proceedings. 

We have the honor to be, most respectfully, 

WILLIAM CLARK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 

Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. AUGTE. CHOUTEAU. 



Sir: St. Louis, October 18, 1815. 

Being about to finish all the duties which, as commissioners appointed to treat with the Indians of the Mis- 
sissippi and its waters, it is possible for us to perform in the present year, we feel it incumbent on us to give you 
a more minute detail of our proceedings, and of the causes that have protracted our duties to the present time, 
than has hitherto been transmitted to the Department over which you preside. 

On the 11th May we met at this place, which was as soon after the receipt of our commissions and instructions 
as was practicable. Our first duty being to send invitations, according to our instructions, to the different tribes or 
nations of Indians with whom the United States were at war at the time of the ratification of their late treaty with 
Great Britain, every effort in our power was employed to procure proper persons for that purpose; but in this suc- 
cess was, for some time, unattainable. Several of the hostile tribes had previously been notified by the Governors 
of this and Illinois Territory of the treaty, and the stipulations it contained in regard to themselves; but, contrary 
to every reasonable expectation, the intelligence thus-communicated seemed to have generated new and additional 
hostility, which was so repeatedly developed in the most flagitious depredations and massacres on the frontiers as 
to produce universal alarm. Those acts of hostility appearing to increase rather than diminish, after we com- 
menced our duties, rendered it extremely difficult to engage any persons to go into the Indian country; subjected 
us to disappointments by some whose fears prevented them from fulfilling engagements after they had made them; 
put it out of our power then to send to several of the tribes, and caused our missions to be more expensive, in con- 
sequence of having to send a greater number of men together, and sending up a party in a fortified boat, as a 
necessary precaution, to guard against danger, without which they could not have been induced to go upon any 
terms. 

Having at length eventually succeeded in procuring some men for the purpose, we prepared and sent off thirty- 
seven talks, (of which a copy is herewith transmitted,) directed to different tribes, hoping that our messengers might 
be able to engage Indians to carry some of those talks to those places where it would otherwise have been impos- 
sible for us to have sent them. In some instances, the Indians having left their villages and gone to their summer's 
2 E 



10 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 140. 



hunt, our messengers were unable to find them; in consequence of which we had to wait for further information, 
and send again. 

The messengers whom we had engaged to go by the direct route to Prairie du Chien were stopped at the mouth 
of Rock river by the .Sacs, who would permit them to proceed no farther. This event, however, we had antici- 
pated, and had previously determined to send some person (if one could be procured) up to the Mahas on the 
Missouri, thence to pass over by land to the river St. Peter's, and thence to Prairie du Chien. This mission we 
deemed very importatit for several reasons: 1st. It was well ascertained the British had been endeavoring, and with 
some success too, to engage the Indians of the Missouri river in the war against us. It was therefore necessary, 
to prevent those machinations from eventuating in hostilities, that we should apprize the tribes upon whom they 
had been practised of the new state of relations between ours and the British Government, as there was no reason 
to believe that the latter would have caused any such information to be there communicated. 2d. By the authority, 
and under the directions of the Governor of this Territory, with the promised co-operation of General Howard, 
while commanding in this district, a part of the Sioux, and other Indians of the Missouri, had been engaged in the 
war on our side, and were then at war with those Indians who had been hostile to us, several of whom they had 
killed after our treaty commenced. As, then, the war thus instigated must have been considered as the act of our 
Government, good faith, in consequence of the treaty with Great Britain, required that it should cease. 3d. The 
Government having determined to establish strong military posts high up the Mississippi river, and there then being 
reason to believe it would have been attempted within the past season, it was desirable that the Indians of the river 
St. Peter's, and others in the vicinity of Prairie du Chien, should be made acquainted with the views and intentions 
of our Government, as such movements, if unexplained, would naturally have excited in them fearful apprehensions, 
in consequence of their having been engaged in the war, and might have put it in the power of the most con- 
temptible Britisj) trader to have produced a serious opposition in that quarter. 4th. Our instructions positively 
required that we should give immediate information to those tribes of the peace that had been concluded between 
the United States and Great Britain, and we saw no other practicable means of effecting it. Besides, it was not 
to be doubted that, by making them the communications and overtures we were authorized to do, many good con- 
sequences would result therefrom, and an important object of Government be effected, even if those Indians should 
not come down and treat with us. 

We should not, however, have been able to accomplish these objects had not Lieutenant Kennerly, (one of 
the disbanded officers equally distinguished by his bravery and enterprise,) seeing the utter impossibility of our 
procuring any other person, voluntarily offered to go on this mission; in which, although he could not succeed to the 
extent of our wishes, in consequence of his having his horses stolen from him, his services were, notwithstanding, very 
important; and he succeeded in sending talks by Indians whom he met with to those he could not visit. 

The Indians who had been hostile to our Government generally manifested an evident backwardness to negotiate 
■with us; attempted to temporize in every possible way, without committing themselves too far; and particularly by 
promising, but delaying, to send forward deputations to treat with us, and by sending incompetent deputations: in 
•which conduct, we have many reasons for believing that they were influenced by unprincipled British traders, who 
endeavored to dissuade them from coming to the treaty; represented our invitations as insidious attempts to decoy 
them into our power, that we might massacre them; induced them to believe that Michiliraackinac would never be 
surrendered, and that the war between the United States and Great Britain would shortly thereafter be renewed. 

Knowing that the Indians had, in several instances, and in a late one in particular, refused to comply with their 
treaties, because, as they alleged, those who made them had not competent power to bind the tribes to which they 
belonged, we felt it our duty to inquire particularly whether the tribes with whom we proposed to treat were properly 
represented; and, in some instances, we had to send back Indians of different tribes for more competent deputations; 
in all of which cases, however, the Indians, interpreters, and agents admitted that those tribes were not sufficiently 
represented. 

Owing to the disappointments and difficulties that have already been explained, we have constantly had under 
our charge more or less Indians from the commencement of the treaty till the 30th ultimo, when we sent oft' about 
one hundred and twenty-five, being all that then remained. 

The delays that have necessarily intervened (otherwise so much to be regretted) have certainly been productive of 
three of the most important treaties that we have made, vig: those with the Foxes, the Kickapoos, and loways, which 
could not have been effected upon the same terms at the commencement of the treaty, nor for some time thereafter. 

Those treaties, with all others that we have concluded, have been mentioned in our former communications, and 
are herewith transmitted. 

According to our instructions, we confined those treaties to the sole object of peace; but the Indians were in 
several instances extremely solicitous that they should also have embraced other subjects; and some further negotiation 
with some of them seems to be recommended by every dictate of policy. 

The Piankeshaws are extremely anxious to reside in this Territory, and wisii to be permitted to sell the small 
tract of land which they own in the Illinois Territory, near the Wabash, for ploughs, horses, farming utensils, &c., 
which are necessary to enable them to make a new establishment. 

The loways are very desirous of coming more closely under the protection of the United States, and, for that 
purpose, wish to cede a part of their lands in order to obtain annuities, like the rest of the neighboring Indians. As 
this is a spontaneous offer on their part, and as the land would be a valuable acquisition on many accounts, and par- 
ticularly so in the event of future hostilities, it might be very advisable to accede to their proposition. 

The Pattawatamies now occupy and assert a right to the land on the Illinois river which is contained in the cession 
made by the Sacs and Foxes in 1804, and it is certainly to be apprehended that, without some adjustment of the 
dispute, the surveyors appointed to survey the military land within the Illinois Territory will meet with some serious 
opposition. 

The Chippewas, Menomonies, and Winnebagoes, who were all invited to send deputations to meet us at Portage 
des Sioux, did not send a single man, nor assign any reason for their not doing so. 

The Sacs of Rock river not only most explicitly refused to treat with us, but manifested without disguise their 
opposition to t\\e views of our Government, and committed many of the most wanton depredations upon the frontier, 
even after the treaty commenced. Their conduct has been so outrageous and improper, that, for the sake of example 
to others, and to produce a proper respect for our Government, good policy requires that they should be compelled 
to make some retribution at least; and if it shall be thought proper that our duties shall be resumed in relation to 
them, we should indeed be very desirous of some particular instructions upon the subject. 

The Indians about Prairie du Chien are represented by Mr. Boilvin (the agent at that place) and several other 
persons who have lately returned from there as being in a state of the greatest commotion, occasioned by their divisions 
with regard to peace with the United States; all of which, together with the conduct of the Sacs, and the failure of 
the Winnebagoes, Menomonies, and Chippewas to meet us, is thought by the most intelligent white men who have 
been in that country, as well as by some of the most respectable friendly Indians, to be the result of the immense 



1815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 11 



presents which the British Government have lately distributed, and the constant intrigues of British traders, who 
certainly have a greater quantity of merchandise on the Mississippi at present than they have ever had in any former 
year; indeed, from accounts from various quarters, it appears tiiat they are making the greatest possible efibrls to 
retain their influence over the Indians, and to engross the whole of their trade. 

Lieutenant Kennedy informs us that, while among the Indians of the Missouri, he received information that 
British traders were among the Mandans, where it was supposed they were making an establishment, as they had 
invited the Sioux to visit them at that place. This establishment is doubtless to be supplied from Hudson's bay, 
or by the Northwest Company of Canada, and, if permitted to mature itself, will enable them to engross the whole 
of the trade of the upper parts of the Missouri river; while equal exertions will be made by them to draw the trade 
of the upper parts of the Mississippi down the Red river of Lake Winnipeg, between which rivers the portage is 
very inconsiderable, and communication easy. 

Having treated with a part of the Indians above Prairie du Chien, it might be desirable, for the purpose of 
removing all jealousies (too easily excited among them at any time) and cultivating a good understanding with 
them, to treat with the rest; but that in the present year is totally impracticable. 

On our first meeting our attention was confined exclusively to those Indians who had been engaged in the war 
against us. We, however, afterwards had the honor to receive a letter from the Hon. A. J. Dallas, of 11th of June 
last, which, with its enclosures, enlarged our powers, and directed our attention to new objects, which have occupied 
a considerable portion of our time. In conformity to our latter instructions, we endeavored to keep ourselves con- 
stantly informed of the dispositions and intentions of the Indians, and the conduct of the British traders among 
them; the general result of which is already communicated. 

We also gave invitations to and were visited by several of the tribes who had remained firm in the interest of 
the United Stales, the good consequences of which were very apparent; and, indeed, if we had not been authorized 
to do so, the jealousies and discontents of those tribes would have been great and serious. 

The Shawanees and Delawares of this Territory made known to us at Portage des Sioux certain grievances 
of which they complain, in talks delivered by two of their principal chiefs, which at their request we have the 
honor herewith to transmit for the information of the President. 

It not having been made our particular duty to investigate the causes of complaint as alleged by them, we can 
only say that, as at present advised, we think them well founded; and being well acquainted with the uncommon 
sobriety and general good conduct of those Indians, the attachment which they have evinced towards our Govern- 
ment, their confidence in its justice, the alacrity with which they afforded their co-operation with us in tMfe late war, 
the progress of civilization among them. Sec, we feel it our duty to recommend them to the benevolence as well as 
to the justice of our Government. 

The Cherokees of Arkansas complain bitterly of the intrusion of the white people, who, they say, destroy their 
game, settle among them without their consent, and act in such a manner as to produce disorders, discord, and 
confusion. 

Those Indians wish a certain tract of country to be assigned them, its bounds to be ascertained, and that the 
most efficient measures may be taken to prevent our own citizens from mixing with them, or otherwise intruding 
upon their lands. , 

We have the honor to be, very respectfully, &c. WILLIAM CLARK, 

NINIAN EDWARDS, 
AUG. CHOUTEAU. 

Talks. 

It is thirty years since we came to this country; when we arrived, the Spaniards told us to look for a suitable 
piece of ground to settle ourselves; after we found the said above-mentioned place, we informed the Spanish officer 
of it, and that we intended to settle ourselves. After we were settled, the commanding officer told us to remain at 
peace, hunt quietly, not to steal horses, nor go to war with any other nations. 

The Spanish commander told us that we might occupy the space of land between the river Cape St. Come 
and to the first creek above Cape Girardeau: this is what the Spaniards told us. Afterwards the Spaniards went 
away, and the Americans took possession of this country. Soon after we went and visited the American commander, 
who made us the same recommendations, and gave us the same advice we had before heard from the Spaniards, 
and that we should experience no difference, and that we should be as happy with them as we had been with the 
Spaniards. We were very much pleased. After the council we held with the Americans, we returned home, and 
told our warriors and young men that their speech was just the same we had understood from the Spaniards. Gov- 
ernor Clark, my father, since three or four years we are very much crowded by the whites, who steal our horses and 
many other things, but yet it has not made us angry, hoping that the American Government will do us justice and 
take pity on our situation. Now that the commissioners are assembled to settle all matters with diflerent tribes, we 
take this opportunity to lay under your consideration our present situation, and hope you will do all in your power 
to see us righted. My fathers, it is all I have to say, and beg of you to inform the President of the United States 
of our state and situation. 

Wabepelathy. — When the Spaniards told us to choose a piece of land, and that we had made choice of it, we 
obtained from them a grant, which has been since recorded by the board of commissioners, and we understand that 
all the concessions granted to the whites by the Spaniards were all good, and we expected ours would be so too. We 
live amongst the whites, and our behavior has been such that no honest white man can have any cause to find 
fault with us, and we are certain they will never have any cause to complain of us hereafter. We have always con- 
ducted ourselves honestly, and intend to continue so. 

Early in the spring, on my return from hunting, I found my house that had been broken open, and what I had 
left in it was all gone. I then took the resolution of moving to another place on the river Castor, to settle myself, 
provided my father Governor Clark would be pleased of my doing so. 

He recommended to us to raise stock and cuhivate our land with industry, and his advice we have followed, 
and wish to remain at this new settlement if we can be permitted so to do, and do not care any thing more for our 
old town; but again, lately, we have been encroached upon by a white family by the name of Jenkins, which we 
hope you will remove from those lands if we are permitted to remain on them. 



Sir: Department op War, November 10, 1815. 

The letter signed by the commissioners, and dated St. Louis, October 18, together with the treaties made 
with the several tribes of Indians, were duly received. The Secretary of War has not yet returned to the city, 
but is daily expected. I am directed by the President to request that you will take the necessary measures for 
removing all white persons who have intruded and settled upon the lands of the Indians within the Missouri Territory; 



12 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 140. 

and should military aid be deemed necessary, you will call upon the officer commanding the United States troops 
in the military department No. 9, who has orders to comply with any requisition that you may make on him for 
that object. 

It is believed that the Pattawatamies can have no well-founded claim to the lands ordered to be surveyed for 
the military bounty lands. As they'have, however, been in the habit of hunting on those grounds, and as the depri- 
vation ma^' be attended with some inconvenience to them, Governor Edwards has been authorized to give them 
two thousand dollars as a compensation. 

I have the honor to be, 

GEORGE GRAHAM, Chief Clerk. 

William Clark, Governor of Missouri Territory. 



Gentlemen: Department of War, November 24, 1815. 

The letter of the honorable Ninian Edwards and Auguste Chouteau Esq. of the 29th ultimo has been 
received by mail. 

In concluding a peace with the Kanzas tribe of Indians, you have pursued the course adopted by the commis- 
sioners appointed to treat with the northern tribes. The hostilities of the various tribes inhabiting the country west 
of the Mississippi have been so general, that this course appears to be necessary, and is entirely approved by the 
President. 

The exertions which the United States have made to effect a general pacification with their Indian neighbors, 
pursuant to the stipulations of the treaty of Ghent, the refusal of the Sacs of Rock river to attend the negotiations 
set on foot by the President for that purpose, and the acts of hostilities which they have committed since they were 
notified to attend the American commissioners, would justify the infliction of the severest chastisement upon those 
savages. The President, however, always disposed to pursue the most liberal policy towards the Indian tribes 
within our territories, preferring their reclamation by peaceful measures to their punishment by the application of 
the military force of the nation, receives with pleasure the intimation that this tribe has manifested a disposition at 
this late hour to listen to the voice of reason and justice, and to return to the habits of peace and friendly inter- 
course with'the United States. You are therefore authorized and instructed to permit the deputation of Sacs to 
meet you at such time and place as shall be convenient to you, and proceed to adjust with them the conditions of 
peace agreeably to your general instructions. The surrender of all property stolen or plundered since they were 
notified to attend the commissioners of the United States may properly be required as preliminary to the permis- 
sion to attend for the purpose of treating. In granting this permission, they ought to be distinctly informed that it 
is entirely the result of the clemency and humanity of the President towards them in particular, and of his general 
disposition to treat with liberality and equity all the Indian tribes within the limits of the United States whose 
conduct shall not render a different policy indispensable. 

Instructions upon the subject of the claim of the Winnebagoes will be communicated to you in due time, if it 
shall be thought that they are necessary. 

I have the honor to be, 

WILLIAM H. CRAWFORD. 

Governors William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, Esq. 



A treaty between the United States of America and the Wyandot, Delaware, Seneca, Shawanee, Bfiami, Chip- 
pewa, Ottawa, and Pattawatamie tribes of Indians, residing within the limits of the State of Ohio and the 
Territories of Indiana and Michigan. 

Whereas the Chippewa, Ottawa, and Pattawatamie tribes of Indians, together with certain bands of the 
Wyandot, Delaware, Seneca, Shawanee, and Miami tribes, were associated with Great Britain in the late war be- 
tween the United States and that Power, and have manifested a disposition to be restored to the relations of peace 
and amity with the said States; and the President of the United States having appointed William Henry Harrison, 
late a major general in the service of the United Slates; Duncan McArthur, late a brigadier in the service of the 
United States; and John Graham, esquire, as commissioners to treat with the said tribes; the said commissioners, 
and tbe sachems, headmen, and warriors of said tribes, having met in council at the Spring Wells, near the city of 
Detroit, have agreed to the following articles, which, when r.ntified by the President, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate of the United States, shall be binding on them and the said tribes: 

Article 1. The United Slates give peace to the Chippewa, Ottawa, and Pattawatamie tribes. 
Art. 2. Thej' also agree to restore to the said Chippewa, Ottawa, and Pattawatamie tribes all the possessions, 
rights, and privileges which they enjoyed or were entitled to in the year one thousand eight hundred and eleven, 
prior to the commencement of the late war with Great Britain; and the said tribes, upon their part, agree again to 
place themselves under the protection of the United States, and of no other Power whatsoever. 

Art. 3. In consideration of the fidelity to the United States which has been manifested by the Wyandot, 
Delaware, Seneca, and Shawanee tribes, throughout the late war, and of the repentance of the Miami tribe, as 
manifested by placing themselves under the protection of the United States by the treaty of Greenville, in eighteen 
hundred and fourteen, the said States agree to pard(m such of the chiefs and warriors of said tribes as may 
have continued hostilities against them until the close of the war with Great Britain, and to permit the chiefs of 
their respective tribes to restore them to the stations and property which they held previously to the war. 

Art. 4. The United States and the before-mentioned tribes or nations of Indians, (that is to say, the Wyan- 
dot, Delaware, Seneca, Shawanee, Miami, Chippewa, Ottawa, and Pattawatamie,) agree to renew and confirm 
the treaty of Greeuville, made in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, and all subsequent treaties 
to which they were respectively parties, and the same are hereby again ratified and confirmed in as full a manner 
as if they were inserted in this treaty. 

Done at Spring Wells, the eighth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred 

and fifteen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 
In testimony whereof, they (the said commissioners, and the sachems, headmen, and warriors of the 
different tribes) have hereunto set their hands and affixed their seals. 

[Signed by the commissioners of the United States and a number of Indian chiefs.] 



]815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 13 

Gentlemen; Department of Wau, June 9, 1815. 

The representations which the President has received from tiie State of Ohio, and the Territories of Mi- 
chigan and Indiana, have rendered it expedient, in his judgment, to take immediate measures for removing the 
hostile excitement which has appeared; and he has been pleased to appoint you to be the commissioners of tlie 
United States for holding a treaty with such of the Indian tribes as it shall be deemed necessary to conciliate upon 
the occasion. You will, therefore, give the chiefs notice of your appointment, and that a meeting will be held at 
Fort Wayne, or at any other place that may be more convenient, and at such time as may be fixed upon by thn 
commissioners. 

The objects of the proposed treaty are, to remind the tribes of their existing relations with the United States; 
to explain to them the nature of the reciprocal stipulations in the treaty of peace and amity lately concluded between 
the United States and Great Britain, so far as they concern the Indians; to inform them of the measures that have 
been taken to carry the treaty of peace into effect, by a mutual surrender of the military posts which the American 
and the British forces had taken from each other during the war; to warn them against any improper practices that 
might involve them in hostilities with the United Stales; to promise a punctual performance of all our engagemenls 
with them; and to insist upon the observance of good faith on their part. 

When the treaty with Great Britain was ratified at Washington, the United States were at war with some of 
the Indian tribes, and at peace with others. By the ninth article of the treaty, the parties reciprocallj' eni;a"-ed lo 
put an end to hostilities with all the tribes or nations with whom they were respectively at war; and, in fullilnient 
of this engagement, the United States appointed commissioners for the single purpose of offering a treaty of peace 
to all the Indian tribes on the Mississippi and its waters with whom they were at war at the time of fhe ratification 
of the trealy. But the United States were at that time in a state of peace and friendship with the tribes inhabiting 
the State of Ohio and the Territories of Michigan and Indiana; and had, in particular, concluded a treaty at Green- 
ville, on the 22d July, 1814, with the Wyandots, Delawares, Shawanees, Senecas, and 3Iiamies. The ninth article 
of the treaty with Great Britain did not, therefore, apply to those tribes; and the fact that peace was re-establislied 
between the United States and Great Britain being generally communicated and known throughout the Indian coun- 
try, no act connected with the British trealy appeared to be necessary upon the part of the American Government 
to preserve peace, where peace already existed. It was also presumed that the British officers and agents would 
themselves communicate the return of peace to all the Indians in arms against them. There is reason to believe, 
however, that these grounds of distinction have not been understood by the Indians, and you will be pleased to take 
particular pains in explaining the conduct of the Government, so as to satisfy them that it has not neglected iheni 
or their interest. 

It will be proper that you should distinctly represent to the Indians that, on the present occasion, the United 
States do not wish to obtain from them any new cession, grant, or privilege whatsoever, but merely to manifest 
their disposition to cultivate peace and good-will, and to secure to themselves the advantages of the treaties which 
already exist. Where the United States have already purchased and paid for cessions of land or privileges of roads, 
the tribes from which they were purchased must of course comply with their contracts; and, particularly, they must 
not, on any pretence, attempt to prevent or obstruct the necessary surveys for ascertaining the boundaries of the 
ceded tracts, and laying out the stipulated roads. The President will in all things set them an example of good 
faith; and you may assure them he will take every occasion to promote their happiness and prosperity, as long as 
they shall show a just confidence in his word, and a friendly disposition towards the children of the American family 
who are placed under his care and protection in their neighborhood. 

The President entertains a strong hope that the Government of Great Britain will evince the sincerity with 
which it ratified the treat)' of Ghent by restraining all its subjects from lawless attempts to alienate the Indians from 
the nation whose territory they inhabit. But every precaution ought still to be taken to detect and defeat such 
attempts. The right of British traders to enter the territory of the United Stales for the purpose of trading with 
the Indians is a proper subject for the consideration of the American Government; but the Government has not 
yet prohibited a fair and friendly intercourse of that nature, and the President is onl}' desirous at present to impress 
upon the Indians that the intercourse is entirely a matter of indulgence, which may he denied whenever it is found 
prejudicial to the interests of the United States. The Indians should be warned against any misrepresentation of 
the late treaty with Great Britain, which there is some reason to think has already been misrepresented. The stip- 
ulations respecting the Indians are reciprocal, and amount, in fact, to nothing more than would have been the case 
if the treaty had not contained them; they merely provide that the parties, as a consequence of the peace between 
themselves, shall severally offer peace to the Indians with whom they were actually at war when the treaty was 
ratified — each party agreeing with the other to place the Indians inhabiting their respective territories upon the 
footing upon which they stood before the war. In doing this, the United States have acted voluntarily; and it must 
not be credited for a moment that Great Britain has had any peculiar agency in obtaining a benefit for the Indian 
tribes, whether they were at war or at peace with us. It will be of some importance also to explain the reason 
which has prevented the immediate surrender of Michilimackinac. The British troops have evacuated Castine, 
Fort Niagara, and Fort Bowyer, and they are preparing to evacuate Michilimackinac; but as their buildings on the 
shore of Lake Huron were burnt during the war, the British charge d'affaires has requested that the troops might 
be permitted to remain where they are until a shelter can be provided for them within their own territory. The 
President, in a spirit of friendly accommodation, has acquiesced in the request, upon an assurance that the post- 
ponement of the surrender would not be unreasonably protracted. In the mean time orders have been issued for 
the surrender of Maiden, provided it can be done without danger from Indian hostilities, before the surrender of 
Michilimackinac is effected. The object of these explanations will be to counteract any suppositions that the treaty 
of peace has placed Great Britain in a new and more advantageous relation to the Northwest Indians; to supersede 
the idea that the Indians have acquired by the treaty a more independent political character than they possessed 
before; and to beget a just confidence in the power as well as the resolution of our Government to maintain its 
rights against every opposition. 

The policy of introducing military stations and factories generally into the Indian country becomes every day 
more and more apparent, as well for the sake of the Indians as for our own sake. An opportunity should be taken, 
therefore, to apprize the Indians that, in order to aid and protect them, and also to guard against encroachments 
upon the property and people of the United States, the President contemplates ordering a chain of establishments 
to be gradually extended from Chicago, along the Illinois, to St. Louis. This will secure for them supplies; will 
afford them an occasional asylum; and will present constant opportunities either to claim redress for any grievances 
that they may suffer, or to communicate intelligence of any dangers that they may apprehend at home or abroad. 
It is, indeed, particularly important that they should be taught a habit of giving to the public agents constant inform- 
ation of any occurrences that concern the peace and the safety of the country. 

A short time before the treaty of Ghent was ratified, a quantity of goods had been sent to the care of Governor 
Cass, for presents to such of the Indians as were willing to take an active part in the war. The design was merely 



24 I N D I A N A F F A I R S. [No. 140. 



gratuitous; and, the occasion for making the presents having ceased, it is believed that the goods remain undistrib- 
uted. If this be the case, and you should think it advisable and serviceable to distribute any part of them among 
the Indians on the present occasion, you may apply to Governor Cass, who will receive instructions to execute any 
requisition that you shall make. 

The President will be desirous to hear the accounts of your progress, and of your prospect of success, as often 
as you can transmit them; and the result of your negotiations, if it is such as may be reasonably expected, you will 
put into the form of a treaty, recognising the existing state of peace, exchanging assurances of mutual friendship, 
and confirming all antecedent treaties and engagements, except so far as they respect a co-operation in the late war 
against Great Britain. 

The compensation of the commissioners and their secretary upon the present occasion will be the same as was 
allowed for the services of the commissioners at the treaty of Greenville, in July, 1814; and the contractor will be 
directed to furnish the necessary supplies upon your requisition, to be deposited at such place and time as you shall 
desire. You will appoint your own secretary, selecting him (if you can advantageously) from the number of meri- 
torious officers who are not retained on the military peace establishment. 

If you should deem a military escort necessary to the safety of the commissioners, you will be pleased to apply 
to the officer commanding the American troops in the department, who will receive orders to grant your request. 
I have the honor to be, &c. 

A. J. DALLAS. 

To Major General Wm. H. Harrison, 

Brigadier General Duncan McArthur, and 
John Graham, Esq. 

Sir: Department op War, June 12, 1815. 

Agreeably to the intimation which was given in my letter of the — instant, the President has appointed 
Governor William H. Harrison, General Duncan McArthur, and Mr. John Graham, to hold a treaty with the North- 
west Indians at Fort Wayne, in the Indiana Territory, at such time as they shall appoint. The President relies 
upon your good offices in preparing the Indians for the proposed council, and in bringing it to an amicable termi- 
nation. He has directed me to communicate to you (in confidence) a copy of the instructions which have been sent to 
the commissioners, that you may see at once the principles upon which your co-operation is desired, and may be 
rendered the most efficient. 

I have, the honor to be, &c. 

A. J. DALLAS. 
Governor Worthington, of the State of Ohio. 
Governor Cass, of the Michigan Territory. 



Sir: Department op War, June 12, 1815. 

My letter of this date informs you that Governor Harrison, General McArthur, and Mr. John Graham are 
appointed commissioners to hold a treaty with the Northwest Indians. If the goods which were sent to your care 
a short time before the termination of the war for the purpose of making presents to such of the Indians as should 
take an active part in our favor have not been distributed, the commissioners are authorized to make a requisition 
upon you for the whole or a part of the goods, to use at the proposed treaty. You will be pleased, therefore, to 
, transmit to them an invoice of the articles, and to comply with their requisition, with as much despatch as is prac- 
ticable. A copy of the invoice, of the requisition, and of the receipt for the delivery, you will be pleased to send 
to this Department. If a requisition should not be made by the commissioners, you will consider the former in- 
structions respecting the disptpsition of these goods to be still in force. 

I am, very respectfully, &c. 

A. J. DALLAS. 
Lewis Cass, Governor of the Michigan Territory. 



Gentlemen: Department op War, June 16, 1815. 

It has been represented to the President of the United States that, during the march to Detroit, a number 
of cattle and hogs, and a quantitj' of grain belonging to the Indians, were taken, or used, or damaged by our troops. 
The President requests that you will examine and ascertain the facts; and he authorizes you to assume, on behalf 
of the United States, the payment of a fair valuation of the property in question. 

I take this opportunity to enforce your general instructions respecting rights already acquired from the Indians 
by treaty. The act of Congress requires two millions of acres of land in the Michigan Territory to be surveyed 
and appropriated for the land bounty allowed by law to the army. You will apprize the Indians of an intention to 
make the surveys immediately, and secure their acquiescence. 

Your commission to treat with the Indians has been transmitted under an envelope to Governor Harrison, the 
first named commissioner. 

I am, very respectfully, 

A. J. DALLAS. 
Gov. Harrison, Gen. McArthur, and John Graham, Esq. 



Sir: Department op War, July 12, 1815. 

In the absence of the Acting Secretary of War, I have been requested by the President to acknowledge 
the receipt of your letter of the 26th ult., and to forward you a copy of your instructions, lest the original, which 
was directed to you at Vincennes, may not have been received. From these instructions, you will observe that it 
is not contemplated to obtain a cession of land from, the Indians at the treaty which you are authorized to hold with 
them, but that its objects are merely those of peace and good-will, and to obtain the fulfilment of all treaties that 
have heretofore been entered into. 

You will also perceive that the time of holding the treaty is left altogether to the discretion of the commission- 
ers; and I am requested by the President to say that, if the preliminary measures which you propose as the means 
of impressing the Indians with more favorable dispositions towards us, and of inducing, the tribes more generally to 



1815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 15 

attend the grand council, are concurred in by the gentlemen acting with you in the commission, you are at liberty 
to pursue them. It is, however, desirable that the treaty should be held at as early a period as may be compatible 
with the attainment of the objects contemplated; and it is hoped here that the evacuation of the western posts by 
the British forces will have so powerful an eflect as to induce them to seek an early and satisfactory termination of 
alt differences with us. 

I have the honor to be, 

GEORGE GRAHAM, Chief Clerk. 
Maj. Gen. Wm. H. Harrison, near Cincinnati. 



Gentlemen: Depaktment op War, August 7, 1815. 

At the request of the Acting Secretary of War, I enclose for your information a copy of a letter received 
from Governor Cass, dated the 7th ultimo. The goods forwarded to Detroit, it is presumed, will be sufficient as 
well for the purposes of the treaty as for those contemplated by Governor Cass. Mr. Dallas has not deemed it 
necessary to give any additional instructions to those which you have already. 

He has approved of the measures proposed by Governor Cass for running the line, and authorized him to call 
out a company of rangers to attend the surveyors, if necessary. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

GEORGE GRAHAM, Chief Cleric. 
Gen. Wm. H. Harrison, Gen. McArthur, John Graham, Commissioners. 



Sir: Detroit, August 26, 1815. 

Having been appointed by the President of the United States commissioners for treating with certain Indian 
tribes inhabiting the territories of the United States, we, immediately on our arrival here, gave notice to the 
chiefs assembled at this place of our wish to meet in council all the Indians belonging to those tribes who had 
taken part in the late war against us, (some of whom, as we are informed, still remain in the territories of His Bri- 
tannic Majesty,) that we might inform them of the provisions in the treaty of Ghent, so far as they were interested, 
and concert with them the proper measures for carrying the same into effect. 

We accordingly requested the chiefs of their respective tribes to invite them to meet us on the 25th of this 
month. This invitation did not produce the desired effect, and we were told in council that they were detained by 
the British agents for Indian affairs. 

Understanding that you have a general control over these agents, we have deemed it as due to the friendly 
relations of our two Governments to apprize you of the fact, not doubting that you will adopt such measures as may 
seem to you most proper to give full effect to the ninth article of the treaty of Ghent, which, you are aware, re- 
quires certain acts on the part of the Indians to whom it applies. 

Our secretary, Major Langham, will have the honor to deliver you this, and will receive your answer. 
We have the honor to be, very respectfully, your obedient servants, 

WM. HENRY HARRISON, 
DUNCAN McARTHUR, 
JOHN GRAHAM. 
The Senior Officer Commanding, Sfc. Maiden. 



Sir: Amherstburgh, August 27, 1815. 

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 26th instant. 

In answer to which I beg leave to inform you that the officer commanding at this post has no control or author- 
ity whatever over the Indians, they being considered as a free and independent people — consequently, at liberty to 
act for themselves. 

All matters relating to Indian affairs are conducted by officers appointed for the express purpose, at the head 
of whom is a deputy superintendent, to whom all communications respecting the Indians should be made. 

I have made every inquiry to ascertain if any regular communication had been received from you inviting the 
Indians to the council you say was directed to assemble on the 25th instant, but can only learn that private 
invitations had been received by individuals, who, it appears, had no objection to going over, but considered it a 
matter of greater importance their attending a council ordered to assemble here on the 26th instant for the ex- 
plaining the articles of the treaty of Ghent. 

I cannot account for the conduct of the person who delivered me your letter, with whom I sent a servant to 
conduct him to the quarters of the deputy superintendent of Indian affairs; but on going part of the way he dis- 
missed the servant, and, as far as I can learn, returned immediately to Detroit, taking the letter with him. 
I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient, humble servant, 

EDWARD BARRACK. 

Major General Harbison, &c., Detroit. 



Sir: Amherstburgh, August 29, 1815. 

On ray landing at Sandwich yesterday, a letter signed A. L. Langham was delivered to me by an inter- 
preter of the United States Indian Department; and the singular circumstances, altogether, on the visit of the 
writer to this post, and his interview with Major Barrack, induced me to defer a reply to your own letter of the 
26th instant, and which I have now the honor to do. 

In regard to the first paragraph of your letter, I beg leave to inform you that the different tribes of Indians and 
their chiefs now resident in the British territory had been fully made acquainted with every article of the treaty of 
Ghent, and that their satisfaction at the same was manifest, and their conduct since orderly and peaceable. 

In regard to the second, I am induced to believe that no detention has taken place on the part of the British 
agents, or any inducement whatever held out to the Indians on this side of the river not to cross over to the councils 
which you speak of. 

In regard to the third, it is needless for me to inform you that the Indians are their own free agents, and are not 
to be forced to act beyond their own pleasure; and I again disavow all knowledge, or even belief, of the fact of their 



16 I N D I A N A F F A I R S. [No. 140. 

being prevented attending the councils you wished; and, also, that the treaty] of Ghent has been most fully ex- 
plained to those Indians who had been in alliance with this Government. 

It may be necessary for me to remark to you, sir, that I am not at all surprised at any disinciinatioQ on the 
part of the Indians on the left bank of these lakes and rivers to visit the opposite shores, when such pains had so 
very recently (to my own knowledge) been taken to prohibit one of them eyer to pass over; and to this line of con- 
duct alone do 1 attribute their not attending your councils, and not to the reasons which you are pleased to assign. 
I have the honor to be, sir, your most obedient, humble servant, 

WM. JAMES, Lieutenant Colonel Commanding. 
To Major General Harrison, &c., Detroit. 



Sin: Detroit, August 30, 1815. 

The letter which you did me the honor to address to me yesterday, in answer to that of my colleagues and 
myself of the 26th instant, was delivered last evening. 

In reply to that part of your letter which relates to Major Langham, I must be permitted to believe that a 
knowledge of all the " circumstances" attendant on his visit to Aniherslburgh would have freed his conduct at least 
from the imputation of " singularity." 

The major, having been furnished with a conveyance by water, reached Amherstburgh late in the evening. It 
was his first object to procure quarters, but finding, upon inquiry, that all the public houses were full, he was under 
the necessity of waiting immediately upon the commanding officer, although he previously understood that he was 
engaged with company. Upon his delivering the letter to Major Barrack, after a hasty perusal of it, the major 
returned it, and informed hiiirthat a Colonel Caldwell was the person to whom the letter should have been de- 
livered, and a servant was sent to conduct Major Langham to his residence. It was not until he advanced some 
distance that it occurred to Major L. that it could not have been the intention of the commissioners that their letter 
should be delivered to any other person than the military commandant to whom it was directed. Being unable to 
procure accommodations and refreshment in the public houses for himself and his men, the sun being nearly down, 
and being unwilling again to intrude on Major Barrack, he thought it proper to set out immediately on his return 
to this place. 

The commissioners approve of his refusing to deliver the letter to Colonel Caldwell, and directed him to re- 
turn it to Major Barrack by any conveyance that might offer. None having occurred for some hours, an inter- 
preter was charged with its delivery. After the departure of the interpreter, the letter of Major Barrack of the 
27tli was received. 

From the answer of Major Barrack to the letter of the commissioners, it appears that he had a very imper- 
fect recollection of the contents of the letter. It was certainly never our intention to apply to a British officer to 
use any " control or authority" over the Indians to induce them to attend the council to which they had been in- 
vited. Our letter contains nothing that could warrant this idea; it was simply a communication of the information 
which had been conveyed to us, that an officer of the Indian department bad exerted his " authority" to prevent 
their attendance. 

It was doubtless incumbent on the two Governments to cause the article in the treaty of Ghent that relates to 
the Indian tribes which were respectively employed by them in the late war to be properly explained to them. I 
receive with pleasure the information you convey that this has been done on the part of His Britannic Majesty, 
that they have expressed their " satisfaction" at it, and promise, in future to be " orderly and peaceable." It is 
much to be regretted, however, that this was not sooner done, as it might have been the means of preventing 
those depredations upon the properly of our citizens, so vexatious and injurious to them as well as troublesome 
to you, and which I have understood have been continued until a very few days past. 

From his excellency Governor Cass I have been informed that the restrictions upon the Indians passing the 
strait, to which you refer in the close of your letter, was in consequence of those depredations, but that it was never 
intended to prohibit the crossing of the Indians at this place. 

I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant, 

WM. HENRY HARRISON. 

Lieutenant Colonel James, Commanding, Sfc, Amherstburgh. 



Sir: Detroit, September 9, 1815. 

Wo have the honor to inform you that we yesterday concluded and signed a treaty with the sachems, head- 
men, and warriors of the Wyandot, Delaware, Shawanee, Seneca, Ottawa, Chippewa, Pattawatamie, and Miami 
tribes of Indians. One copy of this treaty will be delivered to you by Mr. Graham, the other has been deposited 
with Tarhee, (or the Crane,) the principal chief of the Wyandots. 

Although our instructions did not render it necessary, yet we deemed it proper to include in this treaty as well 
those tribes who had been friendly to us as those who had been hostile: 1st. Because many individuals belonging to 
the friendly tribes had taken up arms against the United States, and could only in this way be fully restored to their 
former situation; 2d. Because these tribes wished and expected to be included in the treaty. We hope that the 
President will approve this course, and that the several articles of the treaty will be satisfactory to him. 

We found no difficulty in prevailing on the Indians to agree to renew and confirm all former treaties, and again 
to acknowledge themselves under the protection of the United States, and of no other Power. The Prophet, and 
most of those who were immediately connected with him, left the council and retired to the British territory before 
the treaty was signed. They professed, however, in open council, before thej' went away, the most pacific inten- 
tions, and declared that they would adhere to any treaty made by the chiefs who remained. 

We had at the council a very full representation of all the tribes who are parties to the treaty, and we have 
every reason to believe that they will adhere to it as strictly as they ever have adhered to any former treaty with 
us, unless the British agents should interfere to prevent it. 

The Wyandots are n)uch dissatisfied that the road from the Rapids of the Miami to the western line of the Con- 
necticut Reserve has been laid off so as to cross the Sandusky river at the Seneca village, instead of crossing at 
Lower Sandusky. They say that the road, running as it is laid out, will injuriously interfere with the settlement of the 
Senecas, to whom they granted the lands on that part of the Sandusky many years before the treaty of Brownstown 
was made; and that their understanding of the treaty was, that the road was to run from the Rapids of the Miami to 
the reserved tract at Sandusky. It is their wish that the road should now take that direction, but they are willing 
that it should strike the Sandusky anywhere between the reservation and an old Indian path that strikes the river 
about three miles below the fort. 



1815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 17 

Fully persuaded, from all the information we have received, that a much better road may be got in this way than 
that marked by the commissioners, we have written to the surveyor general, informing him of our having agreed 
with the Wyandot chiefs that it should be so run. 

The chiefs complained to us that our citizens were constantly trespassing upon their lands, some of them having 
commenced considerable farms, without their approbation, while many more employed themselves in hunting and 
destroying the animals which were so necessary to them, and which, indeed, afforded the only support to their 
families. 

We found, upon inquiry, that this complaint was not without foundation, and we did not hesitate to promise the 
Indians that decisive measures would be taken to redress them. We are induced to believe that a proclamation of 
the President, printed and distributed along the frontiers, would have the desired effect. It is unnecessary that we 
should say any thing to you, sir, of the importance of giving the Indians an example of good faith by the strictest 
fulfilment of every engagement we make with them. Good policy, as well as justice, requires this, as a contrary 
conduct would have the effect of procrastinating a further extinction of title to lands, which is now so ardently de- 
sired by the citizens of Ohio. 

The subject of compensation to the Indians who remained faithful to us during the war, for property destroyed 
by our troops, has engaged our attention. There exists considerable difficulty in adjusting some of their accounts, 
from the difficulty of obtaining proper proof; and it appeared that the words of your instructions did not embrace 
some descriptions of property, the loss of which could be easily ascertained, as the remuneration appeared to be just 
and reasonable. Believing that it was within the spirit of j'our instructions, we have therefore agreed to include 
the horses that were clearly ascertained to have been stolen by our people, and to compensate the Seneca tribe for 
their houses which were wantonly burnt by our militia. We had less difficulty as to the former of these items, 
because payment, under such circumstances, is guarantied by existing treaties; and on the latter, because they were 
promised compensation by General Harrison at the time when the destruction of the houses took place. 

As we are unable to close the accounts here for the want of the testimony of Messrs. Johnston and Stickney, 
Indian agents, it has been agreed that General Harrison should undertake the adjustment of the accounts of the 
Shawanee tribe at Piqua, on his return, and General McArthur those of the Wyandots and Seuecas at Sandusky. 

Illness has prevented General McArthur from signing this letter. 

We have the honor to be, with great respect, sir, your humble servants, 

WILLIAM HENRY HARRISON. 
JOHN GRAHAM. 

Hon. W. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



Journal of the proceedings of the commissioners appointed to treat with the Northwest Indians at Detroit. 

Chiucothe, Ohio, August 8, 1815. 

General McArthur and John Graham, esquire, two of the commissioners, met, and appointed Angus L. Lang- 
ham their secretary. 

August 11, 1815. — Proceeded on their journey to Detroit. 

August 15. — Met General Harrison at Upper Sandusky. 

Detroit, August 22. 

The commissioners held a preliminary meeting with part of the Wyandot, Ottawa, Chippewa, and Pattawata- 
mie tribes. 

General Harrison, on behalf of his colleagues. — He saluted his red brothers, the chiefs, in the name of the Pres- 
ident of the United States. He thanked the Great Spirit that they were again permitted to meet, and to talk of 
peace and friendship. 

A treaty had been concluded between the American and British nations, an evidence of which was presented 
to the Indians in the friendly intercourse which subsisted at this time between them. In that treaty it was stipu- 
lated that peace should be offered to the hostile Indians on both sides for their acceptance. In obedience to that 
stipulation, and to the affection which the President felt for his red children, he had sent the commissioners not only 
to bury the tomahawk, and the animosity which the late contest had excited, but also its remembrance. 

He wished to oftisr peace to all the tribes included within the limits of the United States, and all the members 
of those tribes, who had joined the British in the late war, and wished them all to come, and hear the good words 
of the President, sent through the commissioners to them. For that purpose, as all of them had not yet assembled, 
he appointed the 25th for the day on which they should kindle the council fire at the Spring Wells, at which he 
invited them all to attend, and to send word to all the absent members of their tribes, as well those on the other 
side of the river with the British as those on this side, promising that they should be received with friendship, en- 
tertained in safety, and might return if they chose in peace. 

It had been reported to the commissioners that evil birds had been hovering about ihem, whispering in their ears 
that they were to be assembled here on the pretext of peace only to be betrayed and destroyed; that General 
Brown, the great war chief of the United States, (whom they then saw on his left hand,) and his warriors, were as- 
sembled here for that purpose, and other stories of that description, which the red coats had the disposition and 
capacity to invent. He would not condescend to controvert an imputation so foul and false. The conduct of the 
United States towards them they all knew, and he invited any person in the assembly to produce an instance, during 
their long intercourse with the United States, where they had once acted treacherously towards them. 

It was the wish of the commissioners (as none of the Shawanee chiefs were present) to make known to 

(the Prophet) and all the Indians who were now with the British at Maiden, &c., that they should be met with 
friendship at the council fire, but they forbade any entreaties on their part to be used. To them the path to the 
council fire should be open and safe; they might come or stay, at their option. If they came, they should be treated 
as friends. 

The citizens of Detroit had during the war been harassed 'and despoiled of their property. It would be too 
hard if the return of peace brought with it no security or protection to them or their property. They - therefore 
most solemnly enjoined on them to respect the property of the inhabitants, and to abstain from excesses. 

The Bay, a Pattawatamie chief. — Brothers, I salute you. I rejoice'to hear the kind words which, in his good- 
ness, our father has sent to his red children. I rejoice that the tomahawk, stained with blood, will be laid on the 
earth, never, I hope, to be raised again. 

All the red children rejoice with me at the prospect of again treading their wilderness, and pursuing their game 
in peace and security. 

3 E 



18 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 140. 

We will comply with your request by restraining our young men from committing depredations on the property 
of the citizens. We both have some bad men, who act improperly. We will endeavor to restrain them. What 
can be done, we will do. 

Father, I particularly rejoice to meet you again in council and in peace. 

Spring Wells, August 25, 1815. 

T'he commissioners met the chiefs of the Wyandot, Seneca, Ottawa, Chippewa, and Pattawataniie tribes. 

As many tribes whicli were expected soon had not arrived, the commissioners informed the tribes present that 
the lighting of the council fire would be delayed until Monday, the 28th. They e,\pressed a wish, if they had 
received any answer from the Indians on the other side of the river to the invitation to attend the council, to 
hear it. 

Tar-hee, (or the. Crane,) chief of the Wyandots. — He would inform his brothers and friends of the result of 
the message sent to the other side of the river. The message was sent by his nephew, who was met by one of 
the Wyandots, who bore it to Walk-in-the- Water. Walk-in-the- Water being sick, and unable to be the bearer 
himself, seat one of his tribe. The messenger went to the other side, and found the Indians in council with the 
British agents, and delivered the message to the Wyandots. He was answered by one of the British agents, say- 
ing that they had received a message from the other side of the great waters, commanding them to hold a council 
at the same time that the American council should be held; that the young men who were in the habit of passing 
from one side to the other might attend (if they chose) the American council, but they could not spare the chiefs 
until their council should be over; them they wanted near their council fire, as they were convinced that their 
council would involve more of the interests, and be more to the advantage of the Indians, than the American 
council. The agent further observed that they might attend the American council after they had attended theirs. 

[The above was interpreted to the other Indians by Captain Knaggs.] 

Mis-col-no-mie, for the Mad Sturgeon,) a Pattawatamie. — He sent by a Kickapoo the message to the Prophet, 
requesting him to come to this side and attend the council, and bring with him two chiefs of each tribe, to inform 
them of the truth of a complaint which had been made that the British did not issue rations sufficient. The Pro- 
phet answered that he could not come to this side until the council was terminated; after this council was termi- 
nated, he would come over and explain to them his opinions and his conduct. 

General Harrison. — He discovered that the answers received were not the answers of the Indians, but of the 
British agents. Why they should prevent or procrastinate a treaty of peace with the Indians, he could not per- 
ceive, as it was expressly for the purpose of fulfilling a treaty with themselves; that treaty he held in his hand, an 
article of which expressly declared that peace should be ottered to the Indians who had fought against either party. 

The object of the United States was to preserve peace. This wish of theirs for peace did not proceed from a 
dread of war. All the Indians had experienced their bravery in the field. Nations, in their armorial bearing, had 
appropriated to themselves the emblem of some animal whose character they admired and wished to imitate. The 
Americans had taken the eagle, (the king of birds,) holding in one claw the green branch, (the emblem of peace,) 
in the other the arrows, (the emblem of war.) These arrows had been used with success against Great Britain; 
they were used until she manifested a disposition for peace. He held in his hand the result of that disposition — a 
treaty of peace. 

In all his communications with them, he had made them acquainted with what was doing on the other side of 
the great waters. An event had lately occurred there, which, with the approbation of his colleagues, he would 
recite to them. 

At the time that peace was made between the United States and Great Britain, all the world was at peace; since 
which time war has again commenced, by the French nation attempting to restore to their throne the great chief 
Bonaparte; but with the belligerents the United States are still at peace. In this last war, nine kings are arrayed 
against Bonaparte, at the head of whom is the King of Great Britain. These nine kings and some of the French 
people wish to restore Louis XVIII., another king whom the French had driven away. They have had three 
days of hard fighting. During two of these days Bonaparte partly defeated them, having driven them as far 
as from this place to the Maumee rapids. On the third day, however, we have reason to believe that Bonaparte 
was defeated, but it is probable that he had not sufiered more than the allies had done, for they did not drive hira 
farther than the position which he occupied the first day. The British say that they have heard more than we 
have, and that the French nation has dethroned Bonaparte, and restored Louis XVIII. 

It was false if it had been represented to the Indians that Great Britain alone maintained the contest against 
France. France was almost equal to all these nine kings; but a contest between France and any one of those 
kings would be like a fight between the eagle and the sparrow; France would crush them in a moment. 

With these European contests the Americans, as a nation, had nothing to do. These great events excited the 
interest and wishes of individuals, and individual opinion itself was divided — some wishing success to one side, some 
to the other; but as a nation they were not allied to either. Like the Indians, it is true that, being a nation of free- 
men, they had no regard for emperors or kings. 

The foregoing he recited merely as a subject of curiosity to them, and to remove the impression which was at- 
tempted to be made on them, that the fate of America was connected with that of Bonaparte. It had no con- 
nexion with the object of this council. 

A general maxim of the United States was, to consider and treat all the world as friends, unless they were at 
war. They wished it with the Indians, as well as the rest of the world; but, as they had been before told, they 
always gave the option of war or peace. Another maxim was to form no alliances with any of the European na- 
tions, being a strong and powerful nation, and capable of defending itself against all other nations. With the In- 
dians, their neighbors, who with them inhabit the same continent, they particularly desired peace. This desire is 
evidenced by this circumstance, that the United States have never first commenced war against them: war has ever 
commenced from some one or other of their tribes. 

The Shawanees, Delawares, Wyandots, and Miamies were coming, and the Saginaws were expected: the coun- 
cil would adjourn until their arrival. A cannon fired from the fort would be a signal for them to assemble for 
council. 

Note-ge-sheck, ('or 12 o^clock,) a Chippewa. — Brother Knaggs, I am going to interpret for my nation; do you 
interpret for me to my white father. 

We are rejoiced at the prospect of peace, which we infer from your words; we wish for peace, and are glad 
that we are so disposed. I hope and expect that we will grasp each other so firmly by the hand that we will never 
more separate. 

I have little to say at present; all our tribe are not here; when they are assembled you shall hear more; for the 
present, we want plenty of food. 



181.5.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 19 

As the council is about to be adjourned for three nights, we wish our father to bare his breast; we want some 
milk; we also want to smoke. 

Ou-que-nng-sch, (or the UgJy Fdloto,) Ottawa. — He spoke, the representative of three nation?; the three con- 
sidered themselves as one. They were glad that their father was willing to hear them; if he was willing to hear, 
they would ask for plenty to eat. 

The speech of the commissioners made him smile; it made his heart smile; but both his face and his heart would 
smile more if his belly was full. 

They also wanted a little whiskey to enable them to love their squaws more ardently. 

Ordered, That the Indians receive as much provisions as they want. 

Detroit, August 26. 

The commissioners sent a communication to the commanding officer at Amherstburgh, copies of which, and of 
the correspondence which ensued, have been furnished to the Department. 

Spring Wells, August 28. 

General Harrison. — He discovered the same reasons for adjourning the council which existed before — the non- 
attendance of many of the tribes. 

The commissioners had received a communication from the other side of the river, in which they deny having 
interfered to prevent the Indians from attending this council, and tlial the object of assembling a council at Maiden 
was precisely the same with this — to explain to the Indians the treaty of Ghent. It was to be regretted, as their 
object was the same, that they had fixed on the same time for holding their councils; but it was still probable that 
all the Indians who were now at Maiden would also attend this council. He would explain to them again the ob- 
ject of the council. 

When the United States, or Seventeen Fires, and Great Britain, made peace, it was agreed and stipulated that 
both parties should offer peace to the Indian tribes who had raised the tomahawk against them; that the King of 
Great Britain should offer peace to those who had fought against his people on the side of the Americans; and that 
the President of the United Slates should offer peace to those who had fought against his people on the side of the 
British; that the Indians who were then at war should be restored to all their possessions and privileges which the^' 
enjoyed previous to the war. On these terms peace was to be offered and concluded, provided the Indians would 
accept peace on such terms: on such terms the President of the United States now extended the hand of peace; if 
they did not lake hold of it, that part of the treaty of Ghent was at an end. 

If others should not come, the commissioners would make the treaty with those who were present, and forever 
exclude from its circle those who neglect or refuse to come and renew the chain which had united them to the 
American nation. 

Spring Wells, August 29, 1815. 

General Harrison observed that the same cause for postponement still presented itself — the non-assemblage 
of the tribes. This cause had operated so long on behalf of the commissioners that they had resolved to leave it to 
them (who were assembled) at what time the council fire should be lighted. 

He would inform them that the commissioners had just received a communication from the Prophet, in which 
he professes it to have been always his determination to attend this council, (the contrary had, however, been re- 
ported to him in council,) and that a deputation of two chiefs from each tribe of those on the other side of the river 
would also attend on this evening at — o'clock. 

He requested them to decide whether they should appoint to-morrow, or wait until the arrival of those chiefs 
from the other side, and jointly with them determine on the time for lighting the council fire. 

The great object of the council had been often explained; he would not again repeat it. There was another 
object, which was to ascertain what would be the conduct of the Indians who had been hostile to the United Slates 
towards the other tribes and towards the British. 

As the act of declaring war was performed after the manner of the Indians at Greenville last year, the com- 
missioners would take the advice of their old friend the Crane, and have the ceremonies of making peace performed 
after the same manner. The commissioners had frequently explained their sentiments to them; they now wished 
the Indians to express their wishes, and give their advice as to the manner and time of performing these ceremonies. 
The commissioners could receive their answer now, or delay that gratification until to-morrow; if delayed, they 
requested those tribes that had some parts of them on the other side of the river to consult with them on the subject. 

After some deliberation among the tribes — 

The Crane. — As their father had left it to them to determine on the time for meeting their several tribes, the 
Wyandots, Pattawatamies, Chippewas, Ottawas, and their nephews, the Delawares, had determined that three nights 
should intervene, (making Friday.) On the day succeeding the intervening nights the council should be open. 
The reasons influencing this determination were, that the Shawanees had not arrived; that he understood they were 
very sickly, and that cause alone prevented their arrival; and further, with the approbation of the commissioners, 
they wished to send a messenger to the other side of the river, requesting them to come over speedily. 

General Harrison. — The commissioners accorded with the Indians as to the time which they specified, but on 
that day they wished it to be definitely fixed. They cordially approved of their sending a messenger to the other 
side; they were unwilling to stand on a nice point of exactness with them; they wished them to come over and hear 
them, convinced that, after they heard the fair and honorable proposals which they were authorized to make, it 
would remove any prejudice which they might now entertain against the President of the United States and the 
American people. 

Spring Wells, August 31, 1815. 

General Harrison. — This being the day appointed for lighting the council fire, the first ceremony to be per- 
formed would be to remove all difficulty and impediments to their sitting around our council fire. 

The Seventeen Fires had committed the performance of the ceremonies of the day to their oldest son, (the 
Crane,) chief of the Wyandots. The people of the United States were accustomed to liken his fidelity to them to 
the fidelity of the great archangel to his Creator. In war, as in peace, he had ever stood by the Seventeen Fires; 
and they request their red children to consider whatsoever he should say as coming directly from themselves. 

The Crane. — Brothers, I salute you all; I salute you from the bottom of ray heart; I rejoice that I meet you 
here, and return thanks to the Great Spirit that we meet in peace. 

Hearken to me, who am about addressing you on behalf of the Seventeen Fires, and four tribes, the Wyandots, 
Delawares, Shawanees, and Senecas — tribes who have sided with the Seventeen Fires, and consider themselves as 
one with them. Listen to us, the four tribes; we speak in behalf of all the Seventeen Fires. You, brothers, who 
have been on the other side of the river, I address myself particularly to you. You appear to look dark, brothers, 
as you sit before me; your eyes are dimmed with tears, and you cannot see aright. We have had a quarrel — that 



20 INDIANAFFAIRS. [No. 140. 

quarrel has caused your sorrow. I must now proceed to clear your sight; I shall do so in the manner and language 
of our forefathers, in the language which the Great Spirit gave to them to heal their difficulties, and speak peace. 

Younger brothers — you, too, Wyandots, who have seceded from your tribe, and all you who have come from the 
other side of the river: In viewing you, you look sorrowful; you look sorrowful, not only from the operations of 
war, but also from sickness. This cause has not only operated on you, it has reached your women and children. 
This is the reason why your countenances are sad. 

You, brothers, nephews, and Wyandots, who have come from the other side of the river; you who are sad of 
heart, and blinded by tears: I take this wampum into my hand; the Great Spirit gave it to his red children to speak 
with; it was the language of our forefathers; with it, as the emblem of the softest and whitest cloth, I wipe your eyes, 
and the eyes of your women and children, that you may ail see clear again. 

Brothers, listen on. Listen to the Seventeen Fires and the four nations, speaking with one voice. I speak the 
language which the Great Spirit permits. The same cause which prevented you from seeing, prevents you from 
hearing. I now lake the emblem of the softest and finest feather, and clear your ears, that the words of your brothers, 
the Americans, may penetrate your ears, and sink deeply into your hearts. 

Your throats, too, have been stopped; you could not speak the truth; you could not speaik kindly to your 
brothers; with like alfection, I will now clean your throat with the softest and whitest cloth. 

Your hearts, also, in consequence of the disorganization of your senses, have bfeen perverted; I now place them 
aright, that you may not only see, hear, and speak kindly to your brother Americans now, but in all times hereafter. 

Brothers, &c. who have been hostile: Listen on to the Seventeen Fires and the four nations, speaking, &c. 

In consequence of the war and sickness which have raged, the bones of your friends are scattered over the earth; 
1 will now gather them together, and deposite them in one grave, that your minds may be at rest hereafter. 

Brothers, listen on. I have said that I collect your bones; I now bury them, and smooth their graves, that 
posterity travelling over them may not, by observing the protuberance, remember their former animosities. 

Brothers, listen. I hope you will still attend to my words. I have collected and buried the bones of your de- 
ceased friends, and I have smoothed their graves; I have done so by the emblematic language which the Great 
Spirit gave to his children. I now take into my hand (another wampum) a white board, and with it I cover the 
bones of your friends; this board the Great Spirit gave; the sun will not warm through it, nor can the rain wet 
through it; it will preserve the remains of your friends dry and secure. 

Brothers, listen — all listen to what we now speak. We speak in behalf of the Seventeen Fires, and of the four 
nations who have remained faithful to them; we have been addressing ourselves particularly to those who came 
from the other side of the river; but listen now all of you, that you may remember the ceremonies which now are 
performed. 

One bunch of wampum was to clear the eyes, unstop the ears, cleanse the throat, and amend the heart; another 
to collect the bones, to bury them, to smooth the graves, and to secure them by a board, which the sun could not 
warm, nor the rain moisten. 

These were all the ceremonies which would be performed, as the day was far advanced, and their father would 
have but little time to address them. 

General Harrison. — He, on behalf of the commissioners, particularly addressed the Prophet and the Shawanees, 
and all those who had taken up arrps against the United Stales. He saluted them all, and desired to speak to them 
of times past. 

There was a time of dread and dismay, when darkness rested on the forest, when the warrior wandered in 
uncertainty and fear, often sleeping on the blood which covered his path, while his distant and anxious family (con- 
fined in their cabins) were looking frequently in vain for his return. 

At this period you were unfriended and hopeless; he who had stood at your back, and promised to support you, 
had deserted you. At this period our great chief (Wayne) called yuu together, and took you by the hand; he and 
you, in the presence of all the white and red people, raised a great tree, under which you buried the tomahawk which 
had so long been raised between us, and had so often been stained with our blood. Under the shade of this tree, 
for a long period of revolving years, the white and red people enjoyed as much happiness as falls to the lot of 
humanity. But, unfortunately for us all, some young men, more devoted to amusements than to useful pursuits, as 
they were dancing around this tree, accidentally discovered the handle of this long-buried tomahawk. 

The madness which resulted from this accident spread among all the tribes, and was increased by the circum- 
stance of war having commenced about the same time between the Americans and the British. All the red people 
immediately and unadvisedly engaged in the contest, some on one side, some on the other; and we, brothers, 
instead of meeting in the peaceful council-house, encountered in the field. After a long contest between your 
late father the British, and your old father the American, the former acknowledged he was wrong, and agreed to 
make peace. Your American father, who ever regards with his own the happiness of the women and children 
of his enemies, agreed to make peace, and peace was accordingly made. 

The ceremonies which had just been performed wiped away the remembrance of all these circumstances; it 
now remained to bury that mischievous instrument of which he had been speaking, and which had been the cause of 
all our difficulties; but what method should they take to bury this mischievous instrument? It had once been buried 
under the roots of the largest tree in the forest, but wicked men could there find it. He thought of burying it 
under a great house, and putting that house not in the care of men, but under the protection of the Deity himself. 
His thunder and lightning would blast the arm of the wretch who should dare to take it. 

He now presented them with a bunch of wampum, an emblem that the tomahawk was buried under this great 
house; and, on their receiving the hands of the commissioners and the hands of the American war chiefs, they would 
consider war at an end and peace restored. [Hands received — council fire kindled.] 

We had now lighted the council fire, and it behooved them to return thanks to the Great Spirit, who, on this 
day, had blessed them with so many auspicious circumstances — a cloudless sky, a pleasant breeze, and the company 
of the ladies. We ought to pray for some of the attributes of these ladies, who feel none of those angry and malig- 
nant passions which sometimes agitate the rougher sex. They have a lively interest in this council, for they and 
the tender pledges of their affection must feel severely the want of our good faith. 

As the council fire which had been kindled after the treaty of Greenville, to the south of this, was extinguished, 
it was the wish of the commissioners that this should now he the council fire of all the tribes, around which they 
should hereafter assemble under their leading'tribe, (the Wyandots,) who were the original proprietors; and this fire 
they wished extended as far as Brownstown, where it should be under its former keepers, the Wyandots, Ottawas, 
Pattawatamies, and Senecas. 

The second in command of the hostile Indians. — He was rejoiced to hear the news of peace. How pleasing it 
was to see assembled, at this place and at this time, all the white and red brethren, who had so long been parted 
and at variance; that all their voices should now be united in one, and that one for peace! He returned thanks 
to the Great Spirit for these blessings. 



1815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 21 

Listen to what I have to saj': I speak in the presence of the Great Spirit, from whose bounty and goodness 
we receive every thing, and from whose impulse we act. We solemnly promise that nothing but the mandate of 
the Great Spirit shall cause us to break the peace which we have now made. 

He sincerely wished for peace not onl}' with the whites but with all the tribes, one with the other; and that that 
peace should be lasting. He gave thanks to the Great Spirit for this fine day, for this cloudless sky, this pleasant 
breeze, and the attendance of the women — to women who were the mothers of mankind, every reverence and re- 
spect were due. But this happy morning is ever to be remembered and admired; for on this morning, with the 
rising sun, they were met by the messenger who invited them to come and to meet in peace. 

He was solemnly impressed with the ceremonies which had been performed; the ceremonies of their forefathers 
brought to their recollection their virtues and their fidelity to their engagements. The words which had been 
spoken had sunk deep into his heart, after his senses were restored, where they should remain like the bones which 
had been buried in security, and forever. He should never forget the counsel and advice of their wise and venerable 
chief, the Crane, who had performed those ceremonies, nor the instruction which they convey. 

We have, indeed, been distressed, and we have been far astray; but many others have gone astray. Our land 
has been spread with blood, and our bones have been scattered. But I hope all these bones are now collected; we 
will not stumble over them again to remind us of former hostilities, and that white board which protects them from 
injury may never be removed; recollecting the actions and precepts of our forefathers, we shall need no other 
inducement to act correctly. 

It is true what our father has told us of times past; he recalls the burying of the tomahawk, and the erection 
of a great tree over it to keep it forever hid; but, unfortunatelj', the tree withered and fell, and the tomahawk was 
discovered and raised. It is most true, also, that we have suflered much in consequence of it. But now that it is 
to be buried under the great house, under the protection of the Great Spirit, I hope and expect it will never be 
raised again. We agree with our father to bury it there, and join in the wish that the thunder and lightning of 
Heaven may blast the arm of him who attempts to raise it. 

We accept the wampum, emblem of peace, from our father and brothers, and beg leave to return it to them 
with similar sentiments. It is the wish and request of all who sit around me that the calumet be accepted and 
passed all around, and that they should recall the circumstance to mind every inorning that the remembrance of it 
may never be obliterated; that the wampum, connecting their hands and arms together, should be remembered. 
They wished once more to join hands, an emblem that they should never be parted again, and that the scene of this 
transaction, the council-house, should ever be held in remembrance. 

It was delightful to observe the whole congregation smoking together the calumet of peace; but it was now 
growing late. We wish to hear our father first in the morning. Here at this council fire we will again meet to-mor- 
row, again join hands, and interchange our sentiments. 

Spring Wells, September 1, 1815. 

General Harrison. — He addressed those who were late our enemies, now our friends. He had been instructed 
by his old friend, the Crane, that he had omitted, inadvertently, a part of the ceremonies yesterday, which was to 
sweep around the council-house; he would now do so; and he hoped that they might now repose without inconve- 
nience around the council fires. 

M3' children, I now address all of you; I address you in the name of the great chief of the United States, and 
beg that you will attend to me. 

When people have quarrelled and have made friends, it is always unpleasant to recur to the causes which led to 
the quarrel. Under this impression, I shall forbear to tell those who have lately been our enemies that they were the 
first to lift the hatchet; I shall proceed to explain to you all the objects with which the commissioners are charged. 
You have all been informed that the United States and Great Britain, being mutually tired of war, had come to 
a determination to make peace. But if you have been told that this peace was sought after by the United States, 
and that they sent their ministers to England to solicit it, you have been grossly deceived. Both parties went into 
the territory' of a Power that was neutral and equally friendly to both, the United States having absolutely refused 
to go to England for that purpose. 

That the willingness of the United States to make peace at that time was merely the effect of their fondness 
for peace, the posture of their affairs, which stood better at that period than at any other of the contest, would best 
evince. He would particularly cite the affairs of arras on the Niagara frontier. Victory was there claimed on both 
sides; but many of those who were there, and now present, could best tell with what propriety victory was claimed 
by the British. In giving you the history of those transactions, I shall give it to you with truth: I shall do justice 
to the bravery of the British troops during their contest with us, than whom no troops in the world behaved with 
more gallantry. 

The circumstance most disgraceful to the American arms was when the enemy was carrying on his operations 
against the city of Washington. The British, after beating and driving some of our militia who opposed them, 
entered the city where our great national councils were held, and burnt the house of our great chief. They, 
however, only staid there one day, and, having burnt a few houses, went awa}'. 

The same British general, with a much larger army, a few days after, made an attack on one of our great 
cities, (Baltimore,) defended by a few regular troops and some of our militia. This attack was repulsed, their gen- 
eral killed, and their army retired to their ships. In this contest, however, few were killed on either side. 

About the same time the British army, under their great chief. Sir George Provost, (whom they all had heard 
of,) marched against our post at Plattsburgh; at the same time his army was marching by land, their fleet, equal 
at least in force to the American fleet, came with him, and attacked them off Plattsburgh. The result was, the 
almost entire destruction or capture of the whole of the British fleet, and a carnage hardly ever paralleled. 

At the same time. Sir George, with an army, we say of fifteen thousand, but as he says of eight thousand 
operated against our fort, defended by about fifteen hundred, and was repulsed and driven back. This Sir George 
is now in England to be tried for not doing what they think he could have done; whether he is guilty or not, we 
do not know; all we know, and perfectly know, is, that he was defeated. 

On the great waters, where our vessels of war have been engaged, ours have almost uniformly been successful. 
Only in two instances, where the force was nearly equal, has the American navy been unsuccessful. 

So far have those vessels of war sought each other, that the news of peace has hardly reached them. We have 
just heard of a hard-fought battle between our ships, in which the British were defeated, having the captain, another 
officer, and fourteen men killed; our vessel having only four or five killed. Any of the British officers could tell 
them of this fact. 

He was now going to inform them of an event so miraculous that they could hardly believe it, but he called on 
the Great Spirit to attest the truth of it, and which any of the British officers would confirm. Our city of Orleans 
was defended by about five thousand militia of the western country, commanded by one of our great war chiefs, 



22 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 140. 

Jackson. The British, amounting to eight thousand men, came to attack it, but they were repulsed and beaten, 
having lost, as we say, between two and three thousand, and, as the British acknowledge, fifteen hundred killed on 
the field; while, on our side, (he speaks in the presence of the Great Spirit,) not more than eight or ten were 
killed. He would do injustice to the British if he did not inform them that their troops behaved with the most 
determined bravery. The Americans were posted behind a breastwork. The British, headed by their generals, 
moved on them in column. The Americans were from the western country, and knew the use of a gun; every 
shot took effect from our riflemen, while the cannon concentrated their fire upon the enemy. 

At the time that peace was made, the territory which either had acquired was trifling and comparatively equal. 
The British had Castine, Bowyer, Niagara, and Mackinac, which were all small, commanding litde more than the 
ground they stood on; and we had acquired, as they all knew, the western district of Upper Canada. 

Such was the posture of affairs when the British and Americans had agreed to make peace; they asked each 
other, what shall we do for the red people? They have assisted us in the war, let us extend peace to them also; let 
the King of Great Britain extend his hand to those who have fought against him, and let the President of the 
United States extend his hand to those who have fought against the United States. Let us all have peace. They 
therefore agreed that there should be peace, and forgiveness for and oblivion to past hostilities; and that the In- 
dians should be placed on the same footing and in the same situation that they were immediately previous to the 
war, provided the Indians themselves should agree to these conditions and be willing to hold them by the hand. 

The United States more readily agreed to this arrangement, because they were at that time only at war with 
parts of tribes. The Wyandots, for instance, were many of them hostile, while their great chief was ever the most 
faithful of their friends. They could not strike an enemy without wounding a friend; they therefore resolved to 
wipe the tears from the eyes of all, and, in pity to all, to make peace. 

Agreeably to the treaty, the President had appointed the commissioners for the purpose of extending his hand 
to them. They had accepted their hand in that council, but they must identify that acceptance by a solemn treaty 
in the sight of Heaven. The United States had nothing to ask of them; peace was a boon which they gave 
without asking an equivalent; all that was required was for them to accept or reject it; if the latter, that part of 
the treaty of Ghent which regarded it was at an end. 

It was ever the custom of the United States to do every thing in the face of day. For this purpose they held 
their council at this public place, and in this public manner; all might here come, even the British officers. There 
stood at his left hand an officer of the British Government, who had fought against the United States, on behalf of 
his King and country, who came there by the invitation of the commissioners, they conceiving him to be a man of 
an enlightened and liberal mind. All men might here learn if they should say any thing improper to them, and at 
the same time would bear evidence to the engagements they should enter into, and should be witness if they were 
broken. 

He separately addressed himself to those who remained faithful to the United States. 

My children, the President of the United States, your father, esteems you as he ought. You have stood 
by him in the hour of danger, for which he thanks you. Now he requests you to make peace with the British. 
The United States will do every thing in their power to prevent you from waging war against them, or any of 
their subjects. But if you do contrary to their advice, you do it on your own responsibility, and without our as- 
sistance. 

He addressed himself to those who had been hostile. 

Chiefs and warriors, if what we have told you has not been told to you by the British agents, you have 
been deceived; I solemnly declare to you that it has been the instructions of their Government; and they were not 
to aid or assist you in any hostile views which you might have meditated against the United States. 

It is now time to put an end to this long talk, lest our heads should be too full and our bellies empty. We will 
cover the council fire for this evening, that you may refresh yourselves. We wish you to draw provisions in the 
evening, that we may breakfast earlier, and that we may be enabled to do more during the day. 

Spring Wells, September 2, 1815. 

General Harrison. — He could not explain to them the wishes of their great father, the President, better than 
they were conveyed by himself in his instructions to the commissioners. He then read that part of the instructions 
which directed or explained — 

1st. That no new grants were required of them; 

2d. The cultivation of good-will; the confirmation of all former treaties; 

3d. Former treaties to be carried into effect; 

4th. No interfering to prevent the surveying of lands already purchased and paid for by the United States; 

5th. Example of good faith and a regard to their happiness so long as they manifest the same to the American 
family. 

These were the words of the President himself; and a greater confidence could not be placed in them than 
was manifested by reading these instructions to them; the literal meaning of all which was to place them pre- 
cisely in the same situation in which they were previous to the war. 

As two of the commissioners. General McArthur and Mr. Graham, were sick, and himself unwell; as they were 
comfortably provided for, and the succeeding day was Sunday, he wished the council adjourned until Monday, at 
which time he hoped to hear them. He reminded them that there was a secretary to the commissioners, whose duty it 
was to minute the proceedings and the observations made on either side; by which means the President would 
know the sentiments and opinions, not only of each tribe, but of each individual. The delay would enable them 
to arrange their communications in such a manner as not to commit themselves. 

Another inducement to the adjournment was the probability of the arrival of the Indians from Mackinac before 
Monday, as a vessel which was soon expected had instructions to receive them on board. 

Spring Wells, September 4, 1815. 

General Harrison observed that the commissioners were well satisfied with the address received in their 
chamber by the Crane, and said to be the same delivered by the Prophet to the assembly of Indians; but as it was 
not delivered in council, the commissioners requested that they would appoint some one to deliver it there, that 
it might be committed to paper. If their sentiments were the same as were expressed, the council could be termi- 
nated by a treaty in a few days. 

As the whole tribe of the Miamies were admitted to the friendship of the United States at Greenville last year, 
as, also, some bands of the Chippewa, Pattawatamie, and Ottawa tribes, he wished to know if those last named tribes 
were represented in the council, that they might all now, as entire tribes, be included and made parties to the treaty. 

The Pattawatamies ^of the Illinois would meet other commissioners; those of St. Joseph's, and east of it, 
were expected here. He wished to know if they were represented.^ 



1813.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 23 

The Shawanee Prophet addressed the council in a speech, the tenor and subject of which was pacific. 

He said that he spoke on behalf of nine nations — those who had remained with the British, and who had lately 
come from the other side of the river, and he spoke to the Seventeen Fires, and the four nations who had stood by 
their side. 

The British had told them of the treaty which they had made with the Americans on the other side of the 
great waters, and to their great joy taken the tomahawk out of their hands. They then came nearly opposite this 
place, where the news of the arrival of the commissioners met them and communicated universal satisfaction. They 
had now come over to this side; and here also the tomahawk was taken out of their hands, so that they were now 
so completely deprived of tomahawks that he was apprehensive that their old women could hardly cut wood enough 
to make a fire. 

They were not only willing and anxious for peace, but they wanted that peace to be solid and permanent. 

Here they had kindled the council fire. At this council fire they would hereafter assemble, and speak through 
the nations who were the keepers of the fire, as ihey used to do in old times. 

All who came from the other side of the river were pleased with the address of the commissioners, and all took 
them heartily by the hand. 

They were very much pleased with what was expressed the other day of the care and attention which should 
be paid to their women and children. The}' and all their young men felt tenderly for their women and children, 
and were rejoiced to throw aside that mischievous instrument where it should not be again seen by their young 
men. Indeed, they cast every thing from them that they might more readily extend their hands. 

It was the universal wisii of the nine nations to be at peace and in security, and, being so, to do no wrong. 

He almost stood alone; he had but two chiefs with him. If there were more, there might be a diversity of 
opinion; but now there was none; they spoke from the bottom of their hearts. He was not skilled in speaking 
English; he must speak the truth, for he spoke in the presence of the Great Spirit. In his presence, I say, 
brothers, let us take care of our women and children. 

Let us adhere to our chiefs, and thank them for what they have done for us; although we are warriors, let us 
attend now to our women and children, and cast behind us the implements of war, and never look at them again. 

[He addressed all the Indians.] 

Let us be firmly united, hold fast by each other, and direct our united efforts to take care of our families; nor suf- 
fer them, as they have been, to be dispersed and in want. This was the wish of those from the other side with him. 

Brothers and warriors (the commissioners and officers) here at this council, we take you by the hand, [shakes 
hand.] I don't call you fathers, but brothers. Tell my sentiments to the President; he is my father. 

[He addressed himself to his young men, asking them if they heard him and approved his sentiments. He also 
requested that his address might be interpreted to the other tribes.] 

Now, brothers, we have done a good thing. Let there be no reproach or recrimination between us. While 
speaking, I have heard one of our children crying as we have made peace, let him be released. (One confined for 
murder.) 

The Pattawatamic Prophet. — Brothers and warriors: We, I presume, understand each other. We have 
heard what has been said. All know that a solemn treaty is to be made. If there is any man who does not under- 
stand, or disagrees, let him rise up and declare it. 

Let us return thanks to the Great Spirit that we have a return of peace. 

We Pattawataraies speak little. I shall be short, and to the purpose. I claim your attention. 

How pleasing to be assembled together, and to communicate to each other our sentiments! I shall speak my 
sentiments, and speak them freely. We three nations speak together, being of one mind. How flattering to the 
three nations that they should be so united in opinion as to consider themselves as one nation! Let us then speak 
freely to our father at this time, that there may be no equivocation hereafter. 

Around the council fire has been swept. We have now a clear place to repose. The roads are open and 
smooth. Our women and children can stray without impediment. For these things let us return thanks to the 
Great Spirit. 

You Wyandots have near you the person of our father the President, and have heard his words. If you have 
reported his words to us correctly, we shall agree hereafter with you in sentiment, as we agree to speak with and 
through you. 

We flatter ourselves that you have told us the truth. You have come from the President, and with what you 
have told us we are highly pleased, and here accede to. Let there be no reflections or recriminations between us 
hereafter. Let there be nothing but peace. 

How pleasing to meet with those from the other side of the river who have been hostile! They are the same 
flesh, the same nation, and the same species of inhabitants with us. How pleasing that they are again coming to 
reside among us! I address myself particularly to the American Indians. Let us return thanks to the Great 
Spirit — that Being who created all things — that we are now united; nor let us be ever forgetful of what is now done 
for our women and children. Let us realize the happy reflection that, when we are gone on the hunt, we leave 
them, without apprehension, in peace and security. 

We thank you for the ceremonies which have been performed for the purpose of correcting our senses, that 
your words might sink into our hearts. I thank you for so doing; but it was unnecessary. My heart and my sen- 
timents were with you already. 

You American Indians! We thank you for the kind words which you brought to us. You came not only with 
your own kind speeches, but brought with you those of our father the President, telling us of peace and friendship. 

Brothers, Wyandots! We Pattawatamies inhabiting the same country with yourselves, what I say to you 
is with the sanction of all; what I say may be relied on; my nation will stand by me. Whatsoever you say or do 
for us towards the United States, we sanction. We thank you for speaking in our behalf, for correcting our senses; 
and we here^present you, the Wyandots, with this wampum, the memorial of our thanks. We wish you to speak 
after us. I speak on behalf of the Pattawatamie nation. 

[To Tarhee, the chief of the Wyandots:] 

The Pattawataraies presented their thanks for his speaking in their behalf. The wampum then given should 
be a memorial of the friendship of the Pattawatamies for the Wyandots. This was the wish of the chiefs, war- 
riors, and young men of his tribe. 

Wyandots and Shawanees! The Pattawatamies take you by the hand. Tell your children of this our profession 
of friendship for your tribes, and do you old men retain it in recollection. 

We wish you to speak your sentiments. After you, the chiefs of our nation will speak. 

General Harrison. — An unfortunate accident had happened between two Indian warriors, one of whom it was 
supposed was killed. They could not sit in council when blood was shed so near them, nor deliberate when one 
of the tribes must be in grief for the loss of one of their nation. The council would therefore be adjourned. 



24 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 140. 

Spring Wells, September 5, 1815. 

The Crane, (Tarhee.) — Listen to what I have to s.iy: yesterday we had some talk; we four nations return 
thanks to the three nations, Pattawatamies, &c. They have corrected our senses, and we return thanks to the 
Great Spirit that we are assembled here and united together in council. 

After this purification of our senses and adjustment of our hearts, every thing which we see or hear appears 
pleasant to us; for this we thank you. 

He thanked them for what tiiey had done yesterday; he had not performed all, the ceremonies; those that they 
had performed showed that they had not forgotten the language of their forefathers; he had to apologize for the 
omission of some by himself. 

There was a time when the land was in trouble, and the council fire at wiiich they were accustomed to sit was 
destroyed. This was an unfortunate circumstance, and is to be ascribed to the fault of our fathers of Great 
Britain and America, and those of our children who took part with them. This has been a source of much grief 
to the chiefs, that their council fire should be destroyed wherat they assembled. 

When this unfortunate circumstance took place, all the Indian nations took part with one or the other, until all 
were distracted and so disunited that no one nation could say that it was entirely on one side. 

At length, brothers, our fathers, the British and American, agreed to make peace; and, taking their red children 
into view, have afforded them the same advantages with themselves. 

This wise regulation was made by their two fathers, seeing that their council fire was extinguished, and they 
have now kindly rekindled it. Our father, the British, in order to have a fire on his side, has either taken it from 
the old place on this side, where it properly belongs, or has made one of his own. Our fathers who are silting 
here have kindled for us a council fire at this place, which is to extend to Brownstown — a council fire whereat all 
the nations may assemble. They have done it wisely. Let us thank them for it. This fire is kindled by the 
President, by his commissioners. It is pure and it is his own. It burns that all the nations may see it. I hope 
you will all join with me in thanks, in thanks sincere and from the bottom of your hearts, to the President, for 
kindling for us this pure fire. 

It was kind in our brothers from the other side of the river, after the fire was kindled, to come over and 
trim it, that it might burn brighter; they, seeing its blaze from the other side, did every thing in their power to pro- 
mote the good work; they besought us to take care of it, particularly the Wyandots, tfcc, who were the keepers 
of the fire. 

Thus they spoke; I will repeat their speech: "You Wyandots, particularly, attend to this council fire; cherish 
the good work, that peace may extend to the Creeks, thence westward, and around, embracing all the Indians. You 
must not say that you are incompetent to the task, that you are not sufficiently skilled in the mysteries and cere- 
monies of your forefathers; you at least know enough to answer the purpose, and you must not relinquish, through 
indolence, a thing of such great importance." 

He called on all to listen attentively to him at this great council fire which their fathers had prepared for them. 
I shall try to follow the footsteps of our forefathers. 

Wherever was the council fire of our ancestors, there were their minds; here is our council fire, here then be all 
our minds. Place your minds at this spot. I speak from the bottom of my heart when I wish they may never 
wander. Be fixed here, and here be united. 

Our forefathers had a maxim that they had but one road to travel in; that road was peace — a road which 
■women and children could travel in security; a road made by their ancestors. I have said that this was the road 
of our ancestors; let me invite you into it. The Great Spirit inspired those ancestors with the knowledge of it; 
then let all turn their faces towards it. 

Step into this road of your forefathers; it is endless, and.it is safe even for your women and children; the only 
one which is good and broad. 

Listen all to the language of your forefathers: they exhort you to continue in this road; they say it is dangerous 
to step out of it; steep precipices and dark unfathomable gulfs bind close upon it. 

All, far and near, are now travelling in this peaceful road of our forefathers. We must bear in mind that our 
white fathers may again fall out; and our British father has ever been most ready to give us the tomahawk. Let 
us join neither of them hereafter. If they fight, let us retire to one side. They quarrel about things of which we 
know nothing, and in which we are not interested. They quarrel for a time, then make friends, and we make 
friends also, and join hands again as fast as ever. 

He exhorts all, both far and near, to keep in this peaceful path, to take care of their women and children, and 
to hold fast by the United States when they take hold again. 

He exhorts the warriors to hold fast to this good work, to consider the people of the United States, and to treat 
them as brothers. Their happiness will result from it, and the Great Spirit will crown them with prosperity. 

He particularly cautions the warriors and young men of the necessity of paying attention to this good work. 
Wherever they meet with their white brethren, salute them kindly; treat them as relatives, and avoid any difficulties. 
Atteniion to these matters is of the highest importance, as they are the means of securing and preserving friendships. 

Give no attention to bad birds; some of them are ever flying about; turn a deaf ear to them. Remember the 
precepts of your forefathers, the precepts which were given to them by the Great Spirit. 

Turn your attention to this council fire which our father, the President, has kindled for us. Keep your minds 
here, and you will enjoy many years of peace and happiness. 

You have all heard what has been said. We are now fast bound to the United Slates. We require you to 
inform all who are distant and absent that we are bound by the hand and arm to the United States. 

As you have appointed the Wyandots to take charge of the council fire, we depend on you to publish that in- 
formation, that they may be respected accordingly. 

As the council fire is intrusted to him, he begs all their assistance to keep it secure. He gives wampum memo- 
rial of the transaction. 

A few words more. The road leading to the council fire from all the distant brethren, which was cut by their 
forefathers, had grown up and was choked with briers. He would now clear it, that all who turn their faces 
towards the council fire might travel with security and pleasure. 

For the speech of the Pattawatamies, delivered yesterday, uniting with them in council and sentiment, they 
return thanks; they were well satisfied with it. 

General Harrison, in looking around, discovered that many were absent; (this was the day on which the 
Shawanee Prophet and his followers left the council;) he asked if they left any message, or if any could assign a 
reason for their absence. The commissioners could not avoid thinking very singularly of their going off in that 
manner. As no person answered, he presumed that no message was left; he would therefore inform thera of the 
course which the commissioners were determined to pursue. 



1815.] TREATIES WITH TWENTY-ONE TRIBES. 25 

Although, by the advice of the Crane, they had performed all the Indian ceremonies, yet there were none of the 
Indians that did not know that our customs required that they should sign a paper which declared their agreements. 
They all knew that at Greenville the great chief (General Wayne) and all their principal men signed a paper. 
These commissioners would also make out one, and lay it before them for their signatures, which should describe 
nothing which had not been explained to them before — that the United States and the Indians should be at peace, 
and that the Indians should be placed in the same situation in which they were previous to the war. 

As those who had absented themselves had been once invited, he would not again do so; if any of those present 
felt friendly towards them, they might give them notice, and the council would delay its meeting until 3 o'clock; if 
they then attended, it would be considered that they were not absent; if not, they should forever be excluded from 
the treaty which should then be prepared. 

The commissioners do not wish to be understood as prohibiting them from coming over. Any individual may 
return and join his tribe if he does so peaceably. The Shawanees, for instance, may come and join their tribe; but 
as a nation (if they refuse to sign the treaty) they will not be permitted to kindle a fire separate from the fire or 
independent of the chiefs of their nation. 

A warrior of the Pattawataniies from the other side came in and reproached his tribe for saying that the 
absent Indians had left the council in displeasure. They had left it well pleased, and, imagining that every thing 
was finished, had retired. 

Another Indian, being interrogated, averred that an Indian from the other side told him that the British had 
sent word that they wanted them to come over to a council which they were about to hold, and that a speech was 
absolutely sent to this side. 

The first named warrior then observed that the reason of their going was that too many women and children 
were here; that they would commit no depredations on the property of the citizens; and that they thought it not worth 
the while to attend longer, as every thing was done. 

General Harrison, addressing the Pattawatamie warrior, told him that he might listen to what he was going to 
say; he would not ask him to tell it, but he might do so. 

Why, my brothers, has the British agent sent for the Indians to leave this council? Has any thing been said im- 
properly to you? Have not many of their chiefs attended this councils What has been said against the red coats, 
that they should act in this mannerl The United States knew their strength, knew their ability to ward off any at- 
tack so well, that they never have asked assistance, and they never would have asked their red children, if the en- 
emy had not invited them by their example to do so; and then it was done knowing that the fondness of young men 
for war would induce them all to join the enemy if not employed by us. 

Your American father asks nothing of you but for your own benefit. He asks you to bury the tomahawk. Is 
that to your disadvantage? Have you been asked for your lands, or for any thing else? 

Why was the speech sent in this sneaking manner? We do every thing in open day. Every person might see 
and hear us. British officers might attend if they chose. The weather was pleasant, nothing prevented them. If 
this was a good speech, why was it not delivered in public as ours are? 

The council would be adjourned until 3 o'clock the next day. We will not be rash in ascribing a bad intention 
to those who have gone away; if they attend to-morrow, we shall consider them as being always present. 

Spring Wells, September 6, 1815. 
The commissioners explained to the tribes the substance of the treaty. 

Spring Wells, September 7, 1815. 

The treaty was interpreted to the Indians as written, and the names of the subscribers taken. 

Spring Wells, September 8, 1815. 

The treaty signed and sealed by the commissioners on behalf of the United States, and the sachems, headmen, 
and warriors of the Wyandot, Delaware, Shawanee, Seneca, Ottawa, Chippewa, Pattawatamie, and Miama tribes. 

A chief of the Pattawatamies. — He said that he saluted the commissioners, and thanked the Great Spirit that 
the treaty was now finally concluded. He thanked the commissioners, and thanked the President of the United 
States, that they were placed in the same situation that they stood by the ancient treaty of Greenville. All the 
cessions of the lands made by the Indians were confirmed. He gave his consent, though with reluctance. It was 
the act *f their ancestors, who were, perhaps, less enlightened than those of this period. But why should we un- 
cover the graves of the dead, and disturb their ashes? He would not do it. Let the dead rest in peace. He would 
not reflect upon their memories. He would rather say their acts were wise. 

If, however, it were to do again, he would pause; he would reflect. He would look at his children in the cradle, 
and ask what right he had to injure those innocents? what authority he had to deprive them of their rights? 

He hoped that whilst they walked upon the grounds they had acquired of the Indians, they would remember and 
commiserate their situation. He was afraid that their annuities would not be sufficient for them, and hoped that 
they would, when necessary, throw in something in addition to that which they were entitled to by treaty. 

It had pleased the Master of the Universe to place the Indians upon this land, but the scene was now changed. 
Their ancestors had parted with it. 

He begged the commissioners that they would not listen to little stories circulated to their prejudice. 

He again saluted the commissioners, and called the Great Spirit to witness, as was the custom of the Americans 
when they opened a solemn council. 

Paean, chief of the Miami tribe. — He accounted for their joining their old father the British during the war; 
expressed his satisfaction at the return of peace, and at the renewal of the treaty of Greenville. He was also much 
rejoiced that no new concessions of land were demanded of them. They were much distressed from the scarcity of 
animals, and requested that white men might be prohibited from hunting on their lands. 

General Harrison had just been informed by one of our citizens that a Wyandot had told him that the British 
told the Indian that, by the treaty of Ghent, the American Government should pay for the injury done their prop- 
erty at Brownstown. It was a lie. They knew it was a lie when they uttered it; and they might tell them that he 
said it was a lie. There was no such thing contained in the treaty of Ghent. The Seventeen Fires intend to 
satisfy their own friends; but injuries done to those fighting against them they will not atone for. The Indians 
had a just claim on the British for a compensation for those losses. He would not be understood that the United 
States made the British promise in the treaty to do so. It was a thing with which the United States had nothing 
to do. But as the British had seduced them from their duties to the United States, and, by so doing, brought those 
calamities upon them, it was but fair and just that they should compensate them for it. The British knew better 
than to propose such a thing to our ministers at Ghent. They knew that it would have been refused with indig- 
nation. But such a proposition was never made. 
4 E 



26 INDIA N AFFAIRS. [No. 142. 



14tli Congress.] No. 141. [1st Session. 

CREEK GRANT TO GENERAL ANDREW JACKSON AND OTHERS. 

COMMUNICATED TO THE SENATE, JANUARY 19, 1816. 

To tlie Senate and Hnusc of Representatives of the United States: January 18, 1816. 

The accompanying extract from the occurrences at Fort Jackson in August, 1814, during the negotiation of 
a treaty witli the Indians, shows that the friendly Creeks, wishing to give to General Jackson, Benjamin Hawkins, 
and others, a national mark of their gratitude and regard, conveyed to them, respectively, a donation of land, with a 
request that the grant might be duly confirmed by the Government of the United States. 

Taking into consideration the peculiar circumstances of the case, the expediency of indulging the Indians in 
wishes which they associated with the treaty signed by them, and that the case involves an inviting opportunity for 
bestowing on an officer who has rendered such illustrious services to his country a token of its sensibility to them, 
the inducement to which cannot be diminished by the delicacy and disinterestedness of his proposal to transfer the 
benefit from liimself, I recommend to Congress that provision be made for carrying into effect the wishes and re- 
quest of the Indians as expressed by thera. 

JAMES MADISON. 

[Note. — For the " extract," see Indian Affairs, vol. i, page 837.] 



14th Congress.] No. 142. [1st Session . 

TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 

communicated to the. senate, on the 14th of march, 1816. 

» Department op War, March 13, 1816. 

In obedience to the resolution of the Senate of the 2d of March, 1815, I have the honor to transmit the enclosed 
documents, which exhibit the general expenses of the Indian department, embracing annuities and presents, and 
the general and particular views of the Indian trade, called for by the resolution. 

Nos. 1, 2, and 3, exhibit the amount of annuities due and payable, and the sums actually paid to the several 
Indian tribes within our limits; the presents made to them; and the general expenses of the Indian department 
during the four years preceding the 3d of March, 1815. 

In the sum exhibited as presents is included a great quantity of provisions furnished the friendly tribes during 
the war, who, upon account of their attachment to the United States, were compelled to abandon their country and 
take refuge within our settlements. The same cause prevented their engaging in the chase, the principal source of 
their supplies in times of peace. The embarrassments produced by a state of war prevented the regular payment 
of the moneyed part of their annuities, and, in many cases, rendered it impossible to discharge that portion which 
was payable in merchandise. This circumstance presented a strong inducement to furnish them liberally with those 
supplies which we had at command, and which were even more necessary to them than the merchandise which we 
were bound to furnish. It is, however, believed that these supplies have been swelled to an unreasonable amount 
by extensive impositions which have been practised upon the Government in the issue of provisions to them, which 
renders it necessary to discontinue the practice, or to devise new and suitable checks to guard against their repetition. 

The statements marked from A to Z exhibit the state of the fund set apart for Indian trade during the four 
years preceding the 31st of March, 1815. It appears from these statements that, from the commencement of the 
trade to the 31st December, 1809, a loss of $44,538 36 had been incurred, and that, during the period designated 
in the resolution, the sum of $15,906 45 had been gained, notwithstanding the loss of §43,369 61 from the capture 
of several of the trading posts by the enemy during the war. These two items, forming the aggregate sum of 
$59,276 06, may be considered as the commercial profit of the establishment during that period, which would give 
an annual profit of nearly $15,000. But the annual expenses paid out of the treasury in support of the establish- 
ment exceed $20,000, which presents a specific loss of more than $5,000 annually. The difference in the result 
of the management of this fund antecedent to the 31st of December, 1809, from that which is exhibited in these 
statements during the four years preceding the 31st March, 1815, is, no doubt, in a great degree the effect of the 
experience acquired by the prosecution of the trade. It is probable that a more intimate acquaintance with the 
nature of the commerce, a more skilful selection of the goods, and of the agents employed in vending them, and 
a considerable increase of the capital invested in it, will, in a short time, produce a small and gradually increasing 
profit, after defraying all the expenses incident to the establishment, which are now payable out of the public trea- 
sury. Under the most skilful management, the profits cannot be an inducement for continuing the system now in 
operation. That inducement, if it exists at all, must be found in the influence which it gives the Government over 
the Indian tribes within our limits, by administering to their wants, increasing their comforts, and promoting their 
happiness. The most obvious effect of that influence is the preservation of peace with them, and among them- 
selves. The exclusion of all intercourse between them and the whites, except those who have the permission of 
the Government, and over whose conduct a direct control is exercised, has insensibly contributed to this desirable 
object. 

The amelioration in their condition desired by the Government has continued to advance, but in so slight a 
degree as to be perceptible only after a lapse of years. If the civilization of the Indian tribes is considered an 
object of primary importance, and' superior to that of rapidly extinguishing their titles and settling their lands by 



1816.] TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 27 

the whites, the expediency of continuing the system now in operation, under such modifications as have been sug- 
gested by the experience ah-eady acquired, appears to be manifest. The success of such an experiment requires 
the exercise of all the influence which belongs to the annual distribution of annuities and presents, aided by that which 
must flow from a judicious supply of all their wants, in exchange for those articles which the chase and the increasing 
surplus of their stock of domestic animals, will enable them to procure. This influence, skilfully directed for a 
series of years, cannot fail to introduce among them distinct ideas of separate property. These ideas must neces- 
sarily precede any considerable advancement in the arts of civilization, and presuppose the institution of laws to 
secure the owner in the enjoyment of his individual property; because no man will exert himself to procure the 
comforts of life unless his right to enjoy them is exclusive. 

The idea of separate property in things personal universally precedes the same idea in relation to lands. This 
results no less from the intrinsic difference between the two kinds of property, than from the different eflects produced 
by human industry and ingenuity exerted upon them. The facility of removing personal property from place to place, 
according to the will or convenience of the owner, gives to this species of property (in the estimation of the huntsman) 
a value superior to property in lands, which his wants as well as his habits compel him annually to desert for a 
considerable portion of the year. To succeed perfectly in the attempt to civilize the aborigines of this country, the 
Government ought to direct their attention to the improvement of their habitations, and the multiplication of dis- 
tinct settlements. As an inducement to this end, the different agents should be instructed to give them assurances 
that, in any treatj' for the purchase of lands from their respective tribes, one mile square, including every separate 
settlement, should be reserved to the settler, which should become a fee simple estate after the expiration of a cer- 
tain number of years of actual residence upon and cultivation of it. Perhaps an additional reservation of a quarter 
or half-section of land to each member of such family would add to the inducements not only to make such separate 
settlements, but to the raising a family. If measures of this kind were adopted by the Government, and steadily 
pursued for a series of years, while at the same time a spirit of liberality was exhibited in the commerce which we 
carry on with them, success the most complete might be confidently expected. But commerce with our Indian 
neighbors, prosecuted upon a contracted scale, and upon the principles of commercial profit, would tend not only 
to diminish the influence of the Government with them, but could not fail entirely to alienate their aflections from 
it. A period has arrived when the trade must be greatly extended, or entirely abandoned to individual enterprise. 
To reserve the trade in the hands of the Government, whilst the wants of the Indians are but partially supplied, 
would be to make them feel its influence only in their privations and wretchedness. 

The right of the British Northwest Company to participate in this trade, independent of the will of the Govern- 
ment, is now at an end. The settlement of the lands ceded by the Creeks in 1814 will exclude the southern 
tribes from all intercourse with the Spanish ports in the Gulf of Florida. The preservation of peace with those 
tribes, as well as the execution of the plans which may be devised for their civilization, requires that this intercourse 
should not be renewed. The great distance of some of the tribes in the Northwest Territory, and in the northern 
regions of Louisiana, from the settled parts of the United States, will probably make it necessary to permit the Brit- 
ish merchants from Canada to participate in the commerce of those tribes, until more accurate information is ob- 
tained as to their situation and numbers, their wants, and their capacity to pay for articles of the first necessity. 
As this knowledge is gradually acquired, and the mode of conducting the trade better understood, the exclusion of 
foreigners from all participation in it may be safely effected. If the trade is to be continued in the hands of the Gov- 
ernment, the capital ought to be increased to $500,000. The exclusion from all commercial intercourse with 
the ports in the Gulf of Florida, and the necessity of extending our trading establishments farther to the west 
and the north, with a view to the ultimate exclusion of foreign participation in it, forcibly suggest the propriety of 
such an increase. This capital will probably be found greatly below what is necessary to supply the wants of 
the various tribes within our limits. The deficiency, it is believed, will be supplied by the Northwest Company, 
and by individual enterprise. At present, the Governors of our Territories are compelled to give licenses to trade 
with the Indians to every person who can give security. The power of rejecting the application on account of the 
character of the applicant appears to be necessary. If the licensed traders were compelled to take an oath to 
observe the laws regulating Indian trade, it might aid in correcting the abuses, especially in vending spirituous 
liquors, which have too generally been practised by them. It is deemed expedient to establish a depot of mer- 
chandise at St. Louis, or its vicinity, under the direction of a deputy superintendent, who should have power, in 
addition to supplying the regular and established trading-houses, to deliver to persons of good moral character, who 
should be able to give security, any quantity of goods, not exceeding $10,000, for which peltries and other articles of 
Indian commerce should be received in payment at a fair price, and at fixed periods; or that they should be sold 
by the superintendent on account of the purchaser. In the latter case, a premium equal to the use and the risk of 
the capital should be added to the price of the goods. This, as well as several other important ideas, are more fully 
developed in the communication of Governor Edwards and that of the superintendent of Indian trade, which are 
herewith communicated, marked R and Z z. 

In compliance with that part of the resolution which requires my opinion of the expediency of vesting the gene- 
ral management of Indian affairs in a separate and independent department, I have the honor to state that an ar- 
rangement of that nature appears to me to be highly proper if the commerce of those nations is to be retained in 
the hands of the Government. The only rational principle upon which it is considered necessary to place the 
Indian trade under the control of the AVar Department is the necessity of relying upon it for the small military 
force which has hitherto been stationed at the different trading posts which have been established. This counte- 
nance and support could be given to the department to which it might be confided, with the same facility as if it 
still remained snbordinate to the Department of War. The accounts of the superintendent of Indian trade are now 
returned to the Treasury Department, to which, so far, the superintendent is accountable. The accounts of the 
agents of the Government for the several tribes in amity with us are still returned, and settled in the War Depart- 
ment. From the payment of annuities to the various Indian tribes within the United States, a new species of 
jurisprudence has sprung up, which operates as a heavy tax upon the time of the Secretary of War. 

All losses of property by American citizens, from the robberies, thefts, and depredations of those tribes, are to 
be remunerated out of the annuities payable to them. The evidence in all these cases is extra-judicial, and 
requires the examination and approbation of the Secretary before remuneration can be made. The presents 
which are made to them; the allowances to artificers settled among them by the Government; in fact, every dis- 
bursement of money connected with the Indian department, except in the prosecution of trade with them, has to 
receive the special sanction of the head of this Department. The duties incumbent upon this officer, resulting from 
the control of the Indian department, are so multifarious, so impossible to be reduced within general regulations, 
that a considerable portion of his time is necessarily devoted to them. 

The organization of the Accountant's office is such as to render it impossible for that officer, by any human 
exertion, promptly to despatch the business which has been accumulating from year to year, until the mass has 
become so imposing as to render legislative aid indispensably necessary to correct the evil. 



28 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 142, 

The creation of a separate and independent department, to which all the Indian accounts, including those which 
are still settled in the Accountant's office, will not supersede the necessity of modifications in the organization of 
that office. The changes which are deemed necessary to insure the prompt settlement of the accounts of the 
War Department are respectfully submitted to the Senate in the paper marked A 2. 

If a new department be formed, much of the miscellaneous duties now belonging to the Department of State 
ought to be transferred to it. The changes which ought to be made in this regard will obtrude themselves upon 
the attention of the Senate whenever the subject shall be considered. 

It is believed that, at the present moment, no plan can be devised for carrying on the Indian trade that will be 
equally advantageous to the Indians, although it may be more economical to the public. This opinion is founded, 
in a considerable degree, upon the fact that those who have a competent knowledge of the manner in which this 
trade must be prosecuted, to be successful, are destitute of the capital necessary for the prosecution to the extent 
demanded by the wants of the Indians. The capital of those parts of the Union where those persons are to be 
found is not sufficient for the purposes of commerce among themselves. It is exposed to no risks, and the profit 
is great; consequently, it will not be employed in commerce with the Indians. Xhe risks to which capital will be 
subject, when placed in the hands of these enterprising traders, as well from their casual want of integrity as from the 
robberies and thefts of the Indians, will prevent the capitalists of the commercial cities from supplying them with the 
means of engaging in this commerce. The proposition to establish a depot at some point about the mouth of the Mis- 
souri, for the purpose of supplying those who may be able to give sufficient security, with such an amount of goods 
as will enable them to prosecute the trade to advantage, will, in a series of years, produce a number of persons 
skilled in the manner of carrying it on successfully, and create a capital in their hands, which will be probably con- 
tinued in that channel, and eventually justify the Government in leaving it, under judicious regulations, which expe- 
rience will not fail to suggest, entirely to individual enterprise. 

These views are substantially founded upon the conviction that it is the true policy and earnest desire of the 
Government to draw its savage neighbors within the pale of civilization. If I am mistaken in this point — if the 
primary object of the Government is to extinguish the Indian title, and settle their lands as rapidly as possible, 
then commerce with them ought to be entirely abandoned to individual enterprise, and without regulation. The 
result would be continual warfare, attended by the extermination or expulsion of the aboriginal inhabitants of the 
country to more distant and less hospitable regions. The correctness of this policy cannot for a moment be admit- 
ted. The utter extinction of the Indian race must be abhorrent to the feelings of an enlightened and benevolent 
nation. The idea is directly opposed to every act of the Government, from the declaration of independence to 
the present day. If the system already devised has not produced all the effects which were expected from it, new 
experiments ought to be made. When every effort to introduce among them ideas of separate property, as well 
in things real as personal, shall fail, let intermarriages between them and the whites be encouraged by the Govern- 
ment. This cannot fail to preserve the race, with the modifications necessary to the enjoyment of civil liberty and 
social happiness. It is believed that the principles of humanity in this instance are in harmonious concert with the 
true interest of the nation. It will redound more to the national honor to incorporate, by a humane and benevolent 
policy, the natives of our forests in the great American family of freemen, than to receive with open arms the fugi- 
tives of the old world, whether their flight has been the effect of their crimes or their virtues. 
I have the honor to be, respectfully, your most obedient and humble servant, 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

Hon. John Gaillard, President pro tern, of the Senate of the U. S. 



Sm: Department op War, Accountant's Office, February 24, 1816. 

I have the honor to hand you, enclosed, the following statements in relation to Indian expenditures, predi- 
cated upon the resolution of the honorable the Senate of the United States on that subject, viz: 
Statement of presents, &c. to Indians. 
Statement of Indian annuities. 

Statement of disbursements at the several Indian agencies, from 4th March, 1811, to 4th March, 1815. 
Very respectfully, I am, sir, your obedient servant, 

TOBIAS LEAR. 
The Hon. Wm. H. Crawford. 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



29 









■* TJ rji .^ T# 




i2 2 "^ 




>o 








1 






















00 OO CD 00 00 
























^ rH ^ 




i-" 








-0 








^" ££ 




C 








c 




MbO S bo S-. 




. ^ J3 J2 

e2 s e 

1,00 1, u 




E 








P 




















= 3 = = « 




o _ o o 




o 












<J-«! < <1 S 




Z^'&'Z 




Z 






















5 






■T3 


o o o o o 




o o o o 


o 


o o 












*rt 


o o o o o 




O OO o 


o 


o o 







-* 


C 


o o o o o 




o o o o 


,_, 


o o 


^^ 






o o o o o 




o o o o 


o 


o o 










C 


o^>r> "n CO o_ 




CO ■^(O n. 




CO o_^ 










3 




















O 
S 
< 


S " 




c^co 


W) 


oT 












-. -, 




• ■ « - 




^ 












cTco CO ro CO 




coco 




U5 


























"5 


-6 




OO 00 CO 00 00 




00 00 


1 


1 °° 


























00 






















> 




O O IN - 




















(M C» M <0 




^ ^ 
















ji j:i ^ J2 




. ..QJ 




.a 






1 

-8 
CO 






e B e B 




22 S £ 




E 






Ji 

^ 




o o o o r: 




CO 00 2 ii 


1 


1 j; 

o 






o 












































."9 


O O CM T* o 




o o o o 


00 


o o 


^ 




— T 






O O CO o o 




o o o o 


CO 


o o 


b- 




—i 


n 


S. 


O O O CO o 




o o o o 


^_, 


o o 


»o 




00 




O O O CJ> o 




o o o o 


CO 


o o 


tN 








c 


O lO *0 CO •<3' 




<0 O <0 Tp 


ce 


CO o 


I* 


































■*co" 


■* 


c. 


t- 




-« 




e 


«©. 










CN 


















^ 




1 




< 




















. » ... 




II-. 
















co"co (NCjcr* r» 


(N 


e-TcN 










"e 




















CO 


TJ 




S S CO m S 00 


00 


CO 00 


1 


00 






g 
© 


u 




»-''-' .-(.-< r-i j-t 


'^ 


.-4 TH 










> 




o'co 


cT 


^ 




^ 






,^ 






M 




■* ■* 










^ 


T3 




t. cjToCcjr 


u 


u u 














1, (>) CM (^^ 




OJ o 










so 


s 




-g - ^ *. <o" 

B i5 2 5 "^ 


fc22 


EJS'i'i 










•^ 


J= 




S ? = ? 


ii CO CO 


00 CO a) <u 




n3 00 








> 




> >% bo bJC fcjO >. 


C"* ^~' 


l-< rH > > 


1 


F- .-1 






•2 




o rz D r 3 -^ 


msa 


, O 3 




^ £ 






h^ 




■6 


o o o o o o 


CO o o 


o o o o o 


CO 


o o o 












o o o o o o 


CN O O 


O OO O "O 


CO 


O OO 






^ 1 


oJ 


c 


o o o o o o 


o o o 


O O O O CO 


o 


O O o 


-* 






o o o o o o 


-lO o 


-J O O O CO 




o o o 


■o 










o >o 'n ■* CO o 


C3oej_co 


-ij. r- ;o ■<? t^ 




CO »o o__ 


t^ 


























i 
< 


S " 




■* CO 


^ 


oC 


■* 

s 




■«: 


























^-r-4«^^— " _," 


' ' ■ 


' (N'c^^ 




^ ' 






IS 


•c 




C» CO CO CO 00 00 CO 00 








1 ^ 






S 


1 




rH,-l,-(-n-lrtrt rt 




1-1 -1 










,c> 


> 




lOvo'oo'cN COCO'CN 


• 1 1 


1 , hTbT 




^ . 








;z 




CMtNWCM — rHC^ 














-^ 


X 




.g -g J3 J3 J= J3 ^ t, 




u u 




k 








C 




-"-'-■ 












o 






S S 00 


coco £ ii 1 




1 iico 




CO 




^ 




rrSTooooo o 


»-4 T-< ,-1 


--"2 g-g- 




' c^ 






5 






waiZZi^^Z O 


C 3 C 


■5 >2 en m 




en ,S 




CO 


=, 


















of 


tT 




•6 


O O <3> O lO ^ "to O O O 


o o o 


O O O O V) 




o o 


Ki 


<>» 


•§ 




■« 


O O 00 r-lt->0 C< O O O O 


O o o 


O O o o c^ 




o o 


t- 


5»> 








OOCOOOOOOOO o 


OO o 


o o o o ^ 




1/5 O 




t- 








o o T? o o o o> in OO o 


O o o 


o o o o ^ 


1 


1 CM O 


co 


« 






c 


O -O CJ> T- O O »-l> >00 CJl 


T). 00 00 


>o w lO ■* i^ 




°° . 


*c 


s 


-"S 


^ 


g 


-<" cf rH",;'r^''rt" ,-r 


T-Tt^Tf-T 


^"co c^^ 




en 


CO 


s- 


B 




6 


«. 










'^ 




a 














«©■ 


c*^ 


S 






rvAy-^ 


»WXJ |F0^^ 0»\^ 




_ 


-^ 


i-2 




o ^ 




o o 


o o 









"^ 








§/ 


o c 






? 


c 


J ^ 




o o 






»'" 















oooooooooow " 


O OO 


o o o taP 


.?£ 


O o o 






S 


.3 fr 




OOOOOOOOOO fco-2 


o o o 


OO o J^S; 


. o o o 




n 


s 


i-i 


• 


OOOOOOOOOO.- (U 


o o o 


o o o ^6 5 


— 3 


go./,o 




'h 






OOOOOOOUJOO-O Z 


c o o o 


O O O 3 


_= O (N O 




z 


^ 




bo 


OV)CO^O'*i'00^00 3 (U 


"". " o — j: 


i^ c.y 


■5 CO CO .- 

E cjT 




< 

Eh 


^ 


c 


«9. C 




■~ j: 


C— J3 


c 




z 






o 


•" J= 




o ^ 


O . S 







a 




3 u 


O 
o 


o .a 

o^ 

--* 


c 

o 

c 


t' o 
C-O :. 
CO o 












-<; 




«^ 




95 


» 






-5 











. . . 


, . r->^ . 


. 


' •. • 
















^ 








fe 












e 




















« 








Ex 












oT 













.£ 






. . . 


§, 


1 


i . . 




H 












■3 




2" 




z 

u 

I4 




C 








c 
O 




J 




PS 




£ 












o-e . 




«: 














c 




&< 




1 




^ !« „" « e - - s „- 


- 


C * !? 




boa . 




Ed 






°os^i|s III 

III « ill fill 

a J 'S a 5 £ ^ 3 S i2 


III 


to OtohO 


1 

.a 


ill 




Q 



30 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



^ 



^ 





"d 


1 




CJ 












.i 


1 




c 


i 


J, 


'^2,^32,2S,S3BS3S 


1 


^ 
















s 


gT3-a-3-3-3-3-n^T:b^T3 


1 


» 


£ 

a. 

° 2 2S °3 o o o o" c" =" c 




























gdaapopabQcaa 






< 




5i *: 






^1 


2 u-5 


-* ' 


O GO 


Ci ■ 






o 








.2 o 


t--^ ca 




>o 


f^ CO 


o'l 




« (» 




c o 




u 


^ s 




1 

1 








0) i 


ci £-• mooi o «omoooD oo 


t^ 


X-r: 


0-!,,_Cl.__r^O— ___0; T- OMOO o « 


001 


s o 


53 o —of^ 00 — oo-cnc) M 


n\ 




o « 4-- — o o oocroot^-^ « 


C) 




- ''^ ^r." ° '-' "^ ".-^'-'V'^' '^, "", 


o_l 










— m" -^ cT T^ f-^CcT^ C^" GS* 


o'l 


ja 5 


O (« « — _ 




*K^ ^ 


s& ... 


..- i 






« 


u i 


to M^ 




5'-3 


O X' — 


o 


-»• ' * ' o — 


o .2 


•^ to c- 






'0_ "V^o, 


^^ 


QJ C 


^ o'er 


cf 


J3 ^; 


«» ^ ^ 


n 1 






m 


? 




i . 






O ^ =" 


— mcto—o Off5«r^— to c»!o>ocj — -n" 


©3 


^ o •- 


OG0^cv3^t-.O^^_ oo CO-^ -^ t^ oo — tO(NtO 


o 


- ^ = 
o.a 2 


5^T'3;'-''"'^ ooi^M— o nMr^Tjtot^ 


CO 


i^c^ooffoi^c^ ^c^r^cs*^ c^ c^ooovotooo 


00 


m C 


»'*^'^'-* C* C^tO-^ O (NCOCOTpCJCO 


t^ 


4J r s 


o^ CO o to n,S GO* -^ ^ 




-° S ^ 


to CO -^ l^ ' „ 


CI 


•r 2: 4) 


€© . .... . 


CT 


H'SI 




m 


= ^ 








■^.....s . 






-" o >n . »,^ ■ „ ... 






[} - - ..- rs 55S2o.- « 










a 


2 2 c u'2 ".^ S „-2 s S^ s'2 2 -'^' 2^ ^'1 ^ >. ^ „' . 2 2 Z 

iituit£^mumtufuu'^ 111 
















b.EiHMtac2pb.^bMblts.i^ME£b^F^P^>S;^tb£t^fabMM>5k5MM^^ 


_ 


■^ 


''c 
S 
S 

»- 
•"•,••• o 




■p 






E 
o 









bJC 



tuO 



:2 &»■ 

23 5 p. 
E M _ 



«i-S £ 



o-°rt.i 

« g-3 a. 

— -= « 4) 



; -tT c o 






oi c s o tn 

"^ = o = 



- a bjo 
u — c " 



" S = — 



.2 r; C.-r 



• - c £ - 
"^ 3 tn 3 
~ c ts 2 

||.£| 

-= =.- O OD 



£■? Si ? 
? S ^ '^ 



£ ? 0) 

i: 5 4) -s o> 

.2t« J S S 

tn O C u -~ 

O g rt s;i Rt, 

» 5P i 2 £ 

g . = HI 00 o 

£ ai-= s Z 

« OJ-S ^ < 

^^Tl'^oo z: 

!= !r-g . c 



<y ^t 



S.=t= . ^ 

■= = ^ S ;^ 









1S16.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



31 



No. 3. 

Statement of disbursements on account of the Indian department, designating the expenditures in each agency, 
from 3d March, 1811, to 3d March, 1815, as far as accounts have been rendered to this office. 



Settlements. 








.Amount. 






With whom. 


Nature of expenditures. 


Dollars. 




Date. 


No. 


Dollars. 








CHEROKEE AGENCY, (HIGHWASSEE, TENN.) 






1811. 












May 30, 


1314 


Return J. Meigs, agent. 


For disbursements from 1st January to 31st March, 1811, 
for salai'ies of the agent, assistants, interpreters, and 
others employed in the Indian department at High- 
wassee, payments for agricultural instruments, and ex- 
penditures of a contingent nature. 


1,387 03 




.\ugust23. 


1454 


Do. 


For similar expenditures in the 2d quarter of 1811, 


1,241 78 




Dec. 11, 

1812. 
Feb. 24, 


1607 


Do. 


Do. do. 3d do. 


1,126 75 




1740 


Do. 


Do. do. 4th do. 


3,378 23 




May 30, 


1940 


Do. 


Do. do. 1st quarter of 1812, 


1,372 27 




Oct. 24, 


2254 


Do. 


Do. do. 2d do. 


2,146 90 




1813, 












March 26, 


2653 


Do. 


Do. do. 3d and 4th do. 


4,365 04 




.luly 26, 


3020 


Do. 


Do. do. 1st quarter of 1813, 


2,772 03 




Oct. 25, 


3299 


Do. 


Do. do. 2d do. 


1,511 04 




Dec. 31, 


3542 


Do. 


Do. do. 3d do. 


2,043 42 








Do. 


Do. do. 4th do. 


5,617 68 








Do. 


Do. do. 1st quarter of 1814, 


2,735 43 








Do. 


Do. do. 2d and 3d do. 


6,619 18 








Do. 


Do. ' do. 4th do. 


2,522 54 








Do. 


Do. do. 1st quarter of 1815, 


1,519 00- 


40 358 32 








AGENCY AT ARKANSAS. 






1811. 












July 15, 


1395 


Samuel Treat, agent, - 


For his salary from 1st March to 31st May, 1811, 


100 00 




Nov. 23, 

1812. 
Feb. 24, 


1587 


Do. 


Do. do. to 30th September, 1811, 


141 58 




1742 


Do. 


Do. do. to 30th November, 1811, 


167 41 




April 9, 


1833 


Do. 


For sundry articles purchased for the use of the Indian 
department, from September, 1811, to 21st January, 
1812, 


650 00 




Xov. 14, 


22S5 


Do. 
Wm. L. Lovely, agent. 


Do. for chiefs of the Cherokee and Occapah Indians, 
&c., from 1st December, 1811, to 31st August, 1812, 

For disbursements between 1st October, 1813, and 31st 
Jlarch, 1815, for provisions and other articles for In- 
dians, services of interpreters, &c. 


484 29 
1,218 67 


2,761 95 


1811. 

Oct. r, 

1812. 






AGENCY AT BUFFALO. 




1506 


Jasper Parrish, sub-ag't. 


For his salary for the 2d and 3d quarters of 1811, 


225 00 




Feb. 4, 


1700 


Do. 


For his subsistence for the year 1811, - 


109 50 




April 6, 


1816 


Do. 


For liis salary from 1st October, 1811, to 31st March, 
1812, 


225 00 




April 5, 


1703 


Erastus Granger, 


For disbursements in 1811 for salaries of the agent, in- 
terpreters, &c., purchase of agricultural implements, 
and payments of a contingent nature, 


2,038 99 




July 28, 


2074 


Do. 


For his salary, &c. from 1st January to 30th June, 1812, 


576 02 




Oct. 2, 
1813. 


2192 


Jasper Parrish, 


Do. from 1st April to 30th September, 1812, - 


225 00 




Jan. 27, 


2478 


Do. 


For his subsistence for 1812, . . - . 


102 20 




April 7, 


2704 


Erastus Granger, 


For disbursements in 1812 by himself and Jasper Par- 
rish, sub-agent, for articles purchased for the Six Na- 
tions, salaries of the agent, interpreters, &c. - 


10,182 52 




Oct. 1, 


3230 


Jasper Parrish, 


For his salary from 1st October, 1812, to 30th Septem- 






1814. 






ber, 1813, ...... 


450 00 




April 7, 


4004 


Do. 


Forhissubsistencefromlst June to 31st December,1813, 


lir 18 




Oct. 18, 


4534 


Do. 


For his salary from 1st October, 1813, to 30th Septem- 






1815. 






ber, 1814, 


450 00 




March 10, 




Erastus Granger, 


For disbursements made by himself and Jasper Parrish 
from 1st January to 31st December, 1813, for articles 
purchased for Indians, salaries of the agent, interpret- 
ers, &c., and payments of a contingent nature. 


12,974 42 




Oct. 11, 


- 


Jasper Parrish, 


For his salary from 1st October, 1814, to 1st March,1815, 


187 50 


27,863 33 








AGENCY AT CHICAGO. 




1811. 












Nov. 8, 


1553 


Charles Jouett, agent, - 


For his salary from 1st March to 1st October, 1811, 


827 29 




May 20, 


1919 


Nathan Heald, captain. 


For amount paid John Salime, interpreter, from 1st Ja- 
nuary to 31st IMarch, 1812, and for sundry articles for 
the Indian department, . . . - 


242 87 




Dec. 19, 


2358 


Do. 


For services as Indian agent from 1st July, 1811, to 15th 






1813. 






August, 1812, ..... 


410 00 




Feb. 20, 


2538 


Do. 


For disbursements; in 1811 and 1812 for articles for the 
Indians, pay of interpreters, &c. 


897 39 


2,377 55 








CHICKASAW AGENCY. 




1811. 












Nov. 2, 


1560 


James Neely, agent, - 


For disbursements to 30th September, 1811, for sundry 
articles purchased, pay of the agent, interpreters, &c., 
and sundry expenses of a contingent nature, - 


3,435 21 





INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



STATEMENT— Coniinued. 



Settlements. 



Date. No. 



1811. 
Nov. 26, 

1812. 
April 15, 



May 9, 

1813. 
Feb. 12, 



1811. 
Dec. 31 



1812. 
Jan. 23, 

April 23, 

August 25, 



1812. 
April 21, 



1812. 
April 23, 
Nov. 28, 



Nov. 28, 
Nov. 28, 

1814. 
March 25, 



1814. 
March 15, 



April 23, 

1815. 
August 29, 



1906 
2514 



1687 
1860 
2119 



1856 
2319 
2319 

2320 
2321 



James Robertson, agent, 

Do. 
William Cocke, agent. 



Whitmore Knaggs, 



William Hull, 



Whitmore Knaggs, ass't 
agent and interpreter. 
Reuben Atwater, 



■Whitmore Knaggs, 
AVilliam Hull, 



William Clark, 

Peter Chouteau, 
William Clark, 
Peter Chouteau, 
William Clark, 

Do. 
Nicholas Boilvin, 

Benj. Hawkins, agent. 



Nature of expenditures. 



I William Wells, $ 

Jeremiah Morrow, 

Jeremiah Worthington, 
Daniel Kinchaloe, 

William AVells, 

Benj. F. .Stickney, agent, 



Silas Dinsmoor, agent, 



David Files, assist, dep. 

quartermaster gen. 
John McKee, agent, - 



CHICKASAW AGENCY— Continued. 

For disbursements from 1st Oct. 1812, to 31st Dec. 1813, 

Do. from 1st January to 31st March, 1814, 

Do. from 1st July, 1814, to 31st March, 1815, - 

AGENCY AT DETROIT. 

For his salai-y to 30th September, 1811, 

For disbursements in the year 1811 for services of the 
superintendent, interpreters, and others employed in 
the Indian department, articles purchased for civiliza- 
tion, presents, &c. - - - . . 

For his salary from 1st October, 1811, to 31st March, 
1812, 

For expenditures in the Indian department during the 
absence of General Hull, from 2d September, 1811, 
to 16th August, 1812, - . . . 

For salary from 1st April to 16th August, 1812, 

For expenditures in 1812 for pay of interpreters, pre- 
sents to Indians, and expenses attending at treaty at 
Urbana, --.... 

AGENCY AT ST. LOUIS, MISSOURI TERRITORY. 

For disbursements to 30th September, 1811, for erecting 
public buildings, pay of agents, interpreters, and others 
employed in the Indian department, articles purchas- 
ed for promoting civilization, presents, &c. - 

For services of himself, assistant agents, &.C., from 1st 
March to 30th June, 1811, - - . . 

For disbursements to 31st December, 1811, similar to 
the foregoing, - . . . . 

For compensation of himself and others to 30th June, 
1812, and for disbursements similar to the foregoing. 

For expenditures in his agency at St. Louis, from Janu- 
ary, 1812, to oOth September, 1813, by himself and 
Peter Chouteau, similar to the foregoing. 

Do. from 1st October, 1813, to 31st December, 1814, - 

AGENCY AT PRAIRIE DU CHIEN. 

For disbursements in his agency in January, February, 
March, April, and May, 1812, for articles purchased, 
express hire, pay of interpreters, &c. 

CREEK AGENCY. 

For disbursements in the 1st and 2d quarters of 1811 
for salaries of the agent, assistants, interpreters, and 
others employed in the Indian department, purchase 
of agricultural insti-uments, and payments of a contin- 
gent nature, ---... 

For similar disbursements from 1st July, 1811, to 31st 
March, 1813, ---... 

AGENCY AT FORT WAYNE. 

For his services as interpreter from 1st Februarv, 1811, 
to 29th February, 1812, - . .' . 

For services and expenses as commissioner for holding 
a council in August and September, 1812, 

Do. do. 

Do. do. 

For salary to the 15th August, 1812, - 

For disbursements between March, 1812, and Septem- 
ber, 1814, for salaries of the agent, interpreters. Sic, 
provisions and other supplies to Indian warriors, pay- 
ments of a contingent nature, &c. ... 

Do. from September, 1814, to March, 1815, 

CHOCTAW AGENCY. 

For disbursements from 3d March, 1811, to 30th June, 
1813, for salaries of the agent, interpreters, and others 
employed in his department, provisions and other sup- 
plies, and sundry payments of a contingent nature, - 

For salary, &c. from 1st July, 1813, to 7th April, 1814, 

For disbursements at Mobile from October, 1814, to 
March, 1815, for articles for sundry Choctaw Indians, 

For disbursements from September, 1813, to .March, 
1815, for salaries of the agent, interpreters, and others, 
ai-ticles purchased for the agency, &c. 



5,642 30 

999 75 

2,326 50 



6,867 07 
616 33 



1,784 80 
460 92 



14,359 

792 
6,055 
1,489 



17,703 
30,810 



3,255 31 



3,022 85 
12,465 10 



224 00 
231 00 
54 00 



23,043 17 
8,015 50 



38,348 09 
1,852 61 



918 45 
14,296 99 



12,403 76 



11,233 55 



71,211 37 



32,175 14 



55,416 14 



1816." 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



STATEMENT— Continued. 



Settlements. 








Amount. 






With whom. 


Nature of expenditures. 


Dollars. 




Date. 


No. 


Dollars. 








KASKASKIA AGENCY. 






1815. 












Feb. 9, 


4856 


Ninian Edwards, 


For disbursements in 1811, 1812, and 1813, for sundry 








A. 




articles purchased for Indians, pay of interpreters, &c. 


7,908 34 




August 25, 




Do. 


For similar disbursements in 1814, 


2,502 02 


10,410 36 








AGENCY AT VINCENNES. 




1814. 












Feb. 14, 


3717 


John Gibson, - 


For disbursements from September, 1812, to 30th April, 
1813, for articles supphed Indians, pay of interpret- 












ers, kc. ----- - 


1,671 18 


1,671 18 








AGENCY AT NATCHITOCHES. 










Thomas Gales, 


For disbursements for services of sundry persons in the 
Indian department, articles furnished Indians, and pay- 
ments of a contingent nature, in January, February, 












and March, 1815, . - . - - 


4,598 15 


4,598 1 








For the following supplies of provisions, &c. to sundry 












Indians, which could not be classed under the preced- 












ing heads, the accounts not designating the particular 






1811. 






tribe or agency to which they belonged: 






Nov. 2, 


1545 


Augustus Porter, con- 
tractor. 


For rations furnished to Indians at Niagara, Fort Wayne, 
Michilimackinac, Chicago, and Detroit, from 1st March 
toSOth June, 1811, . - - - - 


955 14 




Nov. 28, 


1595 


Do. - 


Do. from 1st March to 30th September, 1811, - 


5,034 13 




1812. 












June 15, 


1966 


James White, - 


Do. from 1st June, 1811, to February, 1812, at Highwas- 
see, Vincennes, Forts Madison and Hampton, 


4,752 63 




August 1, 
August 1, 


2074 


i James Morrison, < 


Do. from 1st May, 1811, to 31st January, 1812, at Forts 






2079 


Massac, Madison, Pickering, Arkansas, &c. - 


916 89 




Dec. 14, 

1813. 
May 26, 


2357 


Starling & Delashmut, 


Do. to the Wyandot Indians in October, 1812, - 


92 32 




2835 


Elbert Anderson, cont'r. 


Do. in the State of New Y'ork, from June, 1812, to Janu- 












ary, 1813, 


7,302 98 




Oct. 5, 


3238 


Augustus Porter, 


Do. to Indians at different places in the State of New 
York, from October, 1811, to 31st May, 1812, 


6,740 29 




Oct. 18, 


3281 


James White, - 


Do. do. from August to December, 1812, 


19,604 85 




Oct. 18, 


3267 


Do. 


Do. do. at Highwassee, from July, 1812, to 29th May, 






1814. 






1813, 


3,912 12 




April 17, 


4023 


Augustus Porter, 


Do. do. in 1812 and 1813, .... 


3,305 18 




Oct. 31, 


4566 


Taylor Berry, - 


For disbursements at Bellefontaine in the quarter ending 
30th June, 1814, ..... 


592 00 




Dec. 8, 


4671 


Ward & Taylor, 


For rations furnished to Indians from June, 1813, to 31st 
May, 1814, ...... 


14,066 92 




Dec. 15, 


4683 


Barclay McGhee, 


Do. from 1st June to 31st August, 1814, 


831 35 




Dec. 21, 


4701 


Augustus Porter, 


Do. at Fort Wayne, from June to August, 1812, 


389 89 




Dec. 21, 


4710 


William Piatt, 


For disbursements at New Orleans, from 1st July to 30th 
September, 1814, for sundry articles for the Indian 
department, ...... 


1,222 50 




Dec. 31, 


4752 


Barclay McGhee, 


For r:itions at Highwassee and Fort Jackson, from 1st 
June, 1813, to 31st May, 1814, 


10,270 64 




March 10, 




Elbert Anderson, cont'r, 
Barclay McGhee, 


Do. in the State of New York from 1st February, 1813, 
10 31st May, 1814, - . - . - 

For rations furnished to Cherokee Indians in January, 
February, and April, 1814, .... 


31,188 85 
1,204 72 




March 15, 




Pollard, a Seneca chief, 


For a horse lost in the United States service, . 


80 00 




March 21, 


- 


William Morrison, 


For rations furnished Indians at Vincennes in Januaiy, 
1813, 


26 00 




April 30, 


4014 


Ward & Taylor, 


Do. at Mount Vernon and Fort Claiborne in July, 1812, 
and May, 1813, - - - - 


604 47 




July 15, 


4292 


John T. Wirt, 


For disbursements at Mobile in 1813, for supplies, 8cc. to 






1812. 






Indians, ...... 


394 38 




May 4, 


1890 


David Holmes, M. T. - 


For payments to David Berry for services as interpreter 






1813. 






from 1st March to 30th June, 1811, - 


100 00 




Feb. 5, 


2506 


Porter Hanks, captain. 


Do. to P. Thierry as interpreter from 1st October, 1811, 
to 17th July, 1812, ..... 


291 00 




Oct. 28, 


3315 


James Taylor, 


Do. at Newport, Kentucky, in 1812, for articles for In- 






1811. 






dians, pay of interpreters, &c. 


355 53 




Nov. 27, 


1594 


Tench Coxe, - 


Do. in the 2d quarter of 1811, for sundry articles for the 






1813. 






Indian department, .... - 


6,151 44 




Dec. 20, 


3504 


Do. 


Do. in the 3d and 4th quarters of 1811, for articles pur- 






1814. 






chased for Indians, . . . . . 


1,387 64 




July 21, 


4329 


Thos. Hamilton, captain 
John H.Piatt, contractor. 


For services of two interpreters at Fort Madison in the 
2d quarter of 1813, . - - - . 

For rations furnished to Indians on the northwestern 
frontier from 1st June, 1814, to 28th February, 1815, 


61 00 
76,073 71 


197,908 57 








489,132 63 



Note. — The accounts for 1811 and 1812 having been destroyed at the Treasury by the British, the entries for those periods 
in the foregoing statement have been taken from the books of this office. 



War Department, Accountant's Office, February 22, 1816. 
5 E 



TOBIAS LEAR. 



34 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



General statement. — The following statement exhibits the amount of property on hand belonging to the United 
States Indian trading-house establishment, (as more particularly shown in the abstracts referred to,) on 
the 31st of March, 1815. 



Amount of property of various kinds on hand at the trading-houses, as per abstract A a. 

Amount of merchandise, cash, and other balances on the books of the superintendent, as per abstract 

marked A b, . . 

Amount of furs, peltries, &c., in the hands of Joseph Saul, agent. New Orleans, as per abstract 

marked Ac,. 
Amount of furs, peltries. &c. in the stores of the superintendent, as per abstract marked A d. 
Amount of property in the hands of James Kennerly, agent, St. Louis, as per abstract marked A e, . 
Amount due from the Treasury for salaries of factors and assistant factors, for which the trade fund 

is in advance, as per abstract marked A/, ..... 

Less amount balances on the books of the superintendent due to sundry persons, as per abstract 
marked A g. 

Present state of the fund, ..... 

Notwithstanding the loss of $43,369 61. (see abstract F m in account F,) destroyed or taken by the 

British and Indians in war during the last four years. 
Original capital, ........ 

Capital as existing on 31st March, as above, . . . . . 

Diminution of capital, estimated on the 31st March, 1815, at . . . . 



$92,250 61 

99,295 85 

49.797 41 

14,416 46 

1,188 45 

7,224 65 



264,173 43 
2,805 34 



$261,368 09 



$290,000 00 
361,368 09 



A a. 

Abstract of property on hand and debts due at the different Indian trading-houses on the Slst March, 1815, as 
per the inventories and accounts rendered the Superintendent of Indian Trade by the factors. 





FORT HAWKINS. 






Amount ot merchandise and contin 


;ent articles, .... 


$995 14* 




Amount of cash. 




117 46 




Amount ot peltry. 




6,782 30 




Amount of debts due. 




3,471 06i 




Amount of buildings, 




727 314 
12,093 28^ 




Deduct debts due by th( 


factory, .... 


85 62 










$12,007 66| 




CHICKASAW. 






Amount of merchandise, 




2,414 72i 




Amount of (urs and peltries. 




205 19 




Amount of debts due. 


. 


3,356 Sli 




Amount of buildings. 




100 00 










6,076 73 




CHOCTAW. 






Amount of merchandise. 




5,825 48 




Amount of peltry, &c. 




17,694 70 




Amount of cash. 




4,676 72 




Amount of bills receivable, . 




273 10 




Amount of debts. 




7,501 53 






OSAGE. 






Amount ot merchandise, 




9,869 75| 




Amount o{ debts due. 




140 71| 




Amount of buildings, 




2,543 60i 










12,554 08 




NATCHITOCHES. 




Amount of merchandise. 




5,386 83 




Amount of furs and peltries. 




8,265 25 




Amount of factory buildings. 




2,239 97 




Amount of furniture, 




200 00 




Amount of cash,' 




108 73^^ 




Amount of bills of exchange. 




4,598 15j 




Amount of debts due, 




474 41 


21,273 35 








DES MOINES. 






Amount of merchandise, furniture, 


&C. .... 


12,301 73 




Amount of debts due, 




4,686 47^ 


16,988 20J 








$104,871 55 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



35 



RECAPITULATION. 



Mei'chantlise, .... ... 

Furs and peltries, ...... 

Cash, ....... 

Debts, ....... 

Buildings, ....... 

Bills of exchange, ...... 

Bills receivable, ...... 

Furniture, ....... 

Deduct debts due by Fort Hawkins factory, . . 

Deduct loss on Indian debts, many of which are old and unsettled from the commence- 
ment of the business: amount as shown above, $19,631 01, estimated at 50 per cent.. 

Deduct loss on the buildings erected at the factories, most of which, being remote from 
settlements, will be of no value when the trading-houses may be removed or discon- 
tinued: amount as shown above, $5,610 885, estimated at 50 per cent. . 


$36,793 66J 
32,947 44 
4,902 91 
19,631 01 
5,610 885 
4,598 15^ 
273 10 
200 00 

104,957 17 
85 62 

9,815 50| 
2,805 44i 


$104,871 55 
12,620 95 






$92,250 60 



A b. 

List of balances due the Superintendent of Indian Trade, and merchandise, cash, and bills remaining in his 

hands on the 31st of March, 1815. 



Thomas Crab, gunsmith, due from him, 

Thomas Waterman, late agent at Philadelphia, 

Joseph Lopez Dias, New York, 

Lemuel Shaw, blacksmith, . 

Samuel Waterman, 

Edward Langley, hatter, 

George C. Sibley, 

John Johnson, 

Abraham Edwards, 

Joseph Saul, New Orleans, . 

James Kennedy, St. Louis, . 

John W. Bronaugh, 

Cash on hand, in the Bank of Columbia, 

Merchandise on hand, 

Indian annuity fund. 

Bills receivable, viz: 
William Clark, drafts on War Department, 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

do. 

Samuel Hattersley's note. 



John Sibley, 


do. 


John Johnson, 


do. 


Andrew Jackson, 


do. 


I). Burford, 


do. 


J. Brown, jun.. 


do. 


J. L. La Rentrie's 


note. 



$7,312 47 
1,349 06 
434 12 
700 00 
654 67 
180 87 
2,812 50 
225 00 



Deduct loss and damage on merchandise on hand, occasioned by the goods being sunk in the George- 
town packets, to prevent their falling into the hands of the enemy on the 25th of August, 1814, 
estimated at . 



$28 70 

1,376 07 

1,615 89 

100 00 

34 70 

78 28 

169 00 

210 00 

1,057 00 

19,121 57 

3,333 49 

3,490 43 

13,533 86 

18,788 28 

24,131 07 



13,668 69 



100,736 03 

1,440 18 
$99,895 85 



36 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



A c. 



Abstract of furs, peltries, 6fc. forwarded, at various times, from, sundry trading-houses to Joseph Saul, agent. 
New Orleans, not included in any of the returns of property on hand at the factories now made, and re- 
maining unsold at New Orleans, March 31, 1815. 



From what trading-house. 


Description of skins. 


Quantity and price. 


Aggregate. 


Total for each 
trading-house. 


Natchitoches, 


Shaved deer skins, 


. 42,771 pounds 


, at 40 cents, 


$17,108 40 






Do. do. . 


6,944! do. 


at 25 


do. 


1,736 00 






Graj deerskins in|hair,(damg'd. 


) 3,589 do. 






456 91 






[N. B. — The above peltries wer 










$19,301 31 




sold by Mr. Saul, April 5th, at th 














prices they are now earned out at. 












Choctaw, 


Gray deer skins, . 


•25,970 do. 


at 20 


do. 


5,194 00 






Do. do. . 




. 11,54G do. 


at 10 


do. 


1,154 60 






Dressed deer skins. 




141 do. 






137 51 


6 486 11 


Chickasaw, . 


Gray deer skins, . 




. 30,706 do. 


at 20 


do. 


6,141 20 






Do. do. . 




5,304 do. 


at 10 


do. 


530 40 






Wolfskins, 




19 skins. 


at 40 


do. 


7 60 






Elk skins. 




1 skin, 






1 00 






Gray deer skins, . 




77,286 pounds 


at 18 


do. 


13,911 48 






Shaved deer skins. 




9,223 do. 


at 20 


do. 


1,844 60 






Panther and wolfskins. 




39 skins. 


at 50 


do. 


19 50 






Beaver skins. 




189 pounds 






205 00 






Otter skins. 




223 skins. 






314 50 






Raccoon skins, 




2,411 do. 






309 78 






Cat skins, . 




177 do. 


at 25 


do. 


44 25 






Fox skins. 




886 do. 






202 50 






Bear and cub skins, 




86 do. 






75 62 






Tallow, 




1,223 pounds 


at 10 


do. 


122 30 






Beeswax, 




330 do. 


at 25 


do. 


82 50 
















23,812 23 


Arkansas, 


Deer skins, 
[All these skins, except the pel- 


1,072 do. 








197 76 








tries from Natchitoches, (as notec 










$49,797 41 




above,) are estimated as to price.] 













A d. 

Abstract of furs, peltries, Sfc. forwarded, at various times, from sundry factories, not included in any of the re- 
turns now made of property on hand at the factories, and remaining unsold at the stores of the superintendent 
on the 31st March, 1815. 



Des Moines, 
Osage, 



Sundry furs, &c. which were sold at auction, 10th April, 
Beaver, 48 J pounds, at $4 65, - 

Sundry furs which were sold at auction, April 10th, 
Bear skins, 256, at $2 75, - - - 



S9,451 86 
225 53 

4,035 08 
704 00 



S9,677 38 
4,739 08 



$14,416 46 



A e. 

Abstract of lead forwarded from Des Moines factory, and beesioax from Osage factory , not included in any of the 
returns now made of property on hand at the factories, and remaining in the hands of James Kennerly, agent, 
St. Louis, on the Slst March, 1815. 



Des Moines trading-house, 22,621 pounds of lead, at 5 cents, 
Osage trading-house, 287 pounds of beeswax, at 20 cents. 



61,131 05 
57 40 

1,188 45 



1816.] 



TRADE Ai\D INTERCOURSE. 



37 



A/. 

Statement exhibiting the amounts due from the United States Treasury for salaries to factors, on the 3lst 

March, 1815. 



Names of agents. 


Capacity employed in. 


Where employed. 


Amounts. 


George C.Sibley, 
John Johnson, - 
Robert B. Belt, - 
Isaac Ravvlings,- 
Thomas M. Linnard, 
George S. Gaines, 
Thomas Malone, 
Jonathan Halsted, 
Charles Magnan, 


Factor, - 
Factor, - 
Assistant, 
Factor, - 
Factor, - 
Factor, - 
Assistant, 
Factor, - 
Assistant, 


Fort Osage, 1 year, - - - . 

Fort Madison, 1 year, ... 

Fort Madison. 1 year, 

Chickasaw bluft's, 1 year, - - . 

Natchitoches, 1 year, - - - - 

Fort St. Stephen's, 1 year, - 

Fort St. Stephen's, 1 year, - - - 

Fort Hawkins, 2 quarters and 81 days. 

Fort Hawkins, 1 year. 


$1,000 00 

1,000 00 

500 00 

1,000 00 

1,000 00 

1,000 00 

500 00 

724 65 

500 00 




$7,224 65 



List of balances due from the Superintendent of Indian Trade on the 31st of March, 1815. 



Peter Gansevoort, late agent at Albany, due him, . - - - 

Nathaniel Leonard, ...-.- 

G. C. Sibley, United States factor at Osage, .... 

John Johnson, United States factor at Des Moines, - - - - 

John Kelly, warehouseman and packer, - - - - - 

William Whann, cashier of the Bank of Columbia, due him for two years' rent for Indian stores. 



«54 48 


998 36 


341 25 


341 25 


30 00 


1,040 00 


$2,805 34 



ANNUAL ACCOUNT GENERAL. 



The United States trading-houses for the Indian trade, carried on at them all, from March 31, 1811, to 

April 1, 1812. 



1812. March 31, 



1812, March 31, 



Drs. 
Chickasaw trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement B a, 
Choctaw trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement B b. 
Des Moines trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement B c, 
Osage trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement B rf, - 
Natchitoches trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement B e, 
Chicago trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement B/, - 
Michilimackinac trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement B g, 
Sandusky trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement B h. 
Fort Hawkins trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement B i, 

Crs. 
Chickasaw trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement B a, 
Choctaw trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement B b. 
Des Moines trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement B c, 
Osage trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement B d, - 
Natchitoches trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement B e, 
Chicago trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement Bf, - 
Michilimackinac trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement B g, 
Sandusky trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement B h, 
Fort Hawkins trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement B i. 



By balance gained in trade, 



$25,564 32 
31,437 20 
33,826 35 
35,549 60 
35,669 66 
18,785 25 
20,123 75 
11,513 60 
17,500 86 



$229,970 59 



$29,170 83 
28,090 82 
38,112 06 
37,479 49 
32,035 48 
20,559 19 
22,127 07 
9,720 47 
17,458 11 



234,753 52 
229,970 59 



$4,782 93 



38 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



B a. 

Annual account particular of the trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Chickasaw Bluffs, from 

3lst March, 1811, to 1st April, 1812. 



181 


. 


Dr. 






April 


1, 


To amount of capital stock at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, - . - . . 
Peltries, - . . - . 
Cash, ----..- 
Contingent articles, - - ' - 
Debts due, - - . . . 


$2,091 97 
2,012 50 
7 OH 
36 00 








3,487 22i 








Buildings, estimated at .... 


100 00 


$7,734 71 


April 


I, 


To amount of furs, peltries, &c., remaining unsold in the hands of agents 








at this date, estimated at - . . . 


_ 


7,964 89 


April 


1, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office in 










March last, which had not reached the trading-house at this date, 


_ 


3,293 09 


181S 










March 


31, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 










since the 1st April last, .... 


_ 


4,314 73 


March 


31, 


To expense ot transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at different places, and due proportion 










of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office. 


_ 


2,823 78 


March 


31, 


To subsistence of the factor and assistant. 


- 


433 12 


1815 




Cr. 




$25,564 32 


March 


31, 


By amount of stock on hand at trading-house: 

Merchandise, .... $7,371 26 
Furniture, implements, &c. - - - 239 97^ 
Furs and peltries, - - . . i,992 25 
Cash, - - - - - 79 50i 
Debts due, .... 3,337 97 
Buildings, estimated at - - - 100 00 


13,170 96 




March 


31, 


By amount received for furs and peltries sold, . . . 


2,099 86 




March 


31, 


By amount received in cash and drafts. 


98 25 




March 


31, 


By amount paid by the trading-house, in part salary of agents, and reim- 
bursed by the Treasury. . - . . 


1,000 00 




March 


31, 


By amount ot furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at - 


12,801 76 








Balance, being estimated gain this year, 




29,170 83 




- 




$3,606 51 



B6. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States Choctaw trading-house, from 3\st 

March, 1811, to 1st April, 1812. 



1811. 
April 1, 



April 
April 


I, 
1, 


1812 
March 


31, 



1812. 
March 31, 



March 31, 
March 31, 



March 31. 



$9,102 60 

11,634 96 

1,325 75 

3,969 90 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at trading-house: 
Merchandise, ... 

Peltries, &c. 
Cash, 
Debts due, ... 

To amount of furs and peltries remaining unsold in the hands of agents 
at this date, estimated at - - - - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office in 
March last, but which had not reached the trading-house at this date. 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since April 1, - . - - - 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at different places, and a due proportion 
of the contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, - 

: Cr. 

By amount of stock on hand at trading-house: 
Merchandise, ... 

Peltry, .... 
Cash. .... 
Debts, .... 

By amount received for furs and peltries sold, - - . 

By amount paid at the trading-house, the salaries of the agent and assist- 
ant agent, and reimbursed at the Treasury, 
By amount of furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at 

Balance, being estimated loss this year. 



86,738 09 

5,791 95 

2,488 31 

3,760 48 



$26,033 21 

147 43 

2,495 06 

780 29 

1,981 21 



18,778 83 
147 43 



1,500 00 
7,664 56 



$31,437 20 



28,090 82 



$3,346 33 



1816.] 



TRADE AxND INTERCOURSE. 



39 



B c. 

Annual account particular of the trade carried on at the United States trading-house atDes Moines, from o\st 

March, 1811, to \st April, 1812. 



1811. 


Dr. 






April 1, 


To amount of capital stock on hand at the factory at this date, viz: 








Merchandise, . - . . - 


$12,229 26| 






Furs, peltries, and lead, .... 


5,017 31? 






Debts due, ..... 


825 57 






Cash, .----- 


19 87 






Buildings, . . . . - 


3,321 00 










$21,413 02 


April 1, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office. 








which had not reached the factory at this date. 


- 


3,726 88 


April 1, 


To amount ol peltries, &c. remaining unsold in the stores of the superin- 








tendent, and in the hands ot agents, at this date, estimated at 


- 


4,266 65 


181-2. 








March 31, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 








since 1st April last, cost - - 
To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 


. 


2,720 06 


March 31, 


k 






store rent, in preserving furs and peltries at dift'erertt places, interpret- 








ers, and due proportion of contingent expenses at superintendent's 








office, estimated at - 


. 


1,184 74 


March 31, 


To amount of subsistence of factor and assistant factor from 1st April 








last to this date, ..... 


- 


515 00 


1812. 


Cr. 




33,826 35 


March 31, 


By amount of stock on hand at the factory, viz: 

Merchandise, .... $8,616 44 
Furs, peltries, and lead, - - - 9,443 \^ 
Debts due, .... i,io9 76| 
Cash, - - - - - 218 76i 
Buildings, .... 3,321 oo 


22,709 16 
10,762 11 




March 31, 


By amount received for furs, peltries, &c. sold, - - - 




March 31, 


By amount of lurs, peltries, &c. in store for sale at this date, estimated at 


4,309 79 




March 31, 


By amount paid at the factory in part of agents' salaries, and reimbursed 








by the Treasury, from 1st April to this date, - 


331 00 






Balance, being estimated gain this year. 




38,112 06 




- 




$4,285 71 



B d. 

Annual account particular of trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Osage, from 31st March, 

1811, to 1st April, 1812. 



1811 




Dr. 






April 


1, 


To amount of capital stock at the factory, viz: 

Merchandise, &c. cost - - - ' - 
Furs and peltries, ..... 
Buildings, ..... 
Debts due, ..... 


$21,331 874 
2,822 26 
3,180 00 
2,255 30 


$29,589 43 






April 


1, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from superintendent's office, which 










had not reached the factory at this date. 


. 


229 87 


April 


1, 


To amount of peltries, &c. remaining unsold in the stores of the super- 










intendent and in the hands of agents at this date. 


. 


4,257 10 


181S 


. 








March 


31, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded since 1st April last, - 


- 


534 94 


March 


31, 


To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving furs and peltries at diffierent places, inter- 
preters, and dueiproportion of contingent expenses at superintendent's 










office, estimated at - 


. 


423 26 


March 


31, 


To amount of subsistence of factor and assistant factor, from 1st April 










last to this date, ..... 


- 


515 00 


1812. 


Cr. 




35,549 60 


March 


31, 


By amount received for furs and peltries sold, - - 


6,151 46 




March 


31, 


By amount received in cash and drafts, 


3,480 00 




March 


31, 


By amount of furs, peltries, &c. in store for sale at this date, estimated at 


4,222 74 




March 


31, 


By amount of stock on hand at factory, viz: 

Merchandise, &c. - - - . $14,544 77 
Furs and peltries, .... 5,307 13 
Buildings, .... 2,443 00 
Debts due, . . . . 522 46 
Cash, . . - . . 105 28 


22,922 64 




March 


31, 


By amount paid at the factory in part of agents' salaries, and reimbursed 








by the Treasury, from Ist April, 1811, to this date, 


702 65 








Balance, being estimated gain this year. 


- 


37,479 49 




$1,929 89 



40 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



Be. 



Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Natchitoches, 
from Slst March, 1811, to 1st April, 1812. 



1811. 


Dr. 






April 


1, 


To amount ot capital stock on hand at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, cost ----- 
Furs and peltries, cost . . - . 
Buildings, cost - - . . - 
Debts due, . . . - . 


$6,395 00 
2,157 79 
2,239 97 
1,155 22 


$11,947 98 
9,607 59 


April 


1, 


To furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at - 


- 


1812. 








March 


31, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 










since April 1st, cost - - - - - 


. 


9,099 70 


March 


31. 


To expenses of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at different places, and a due propor- 










tion of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office. 


- 


4,649 39 


March 


31, 


To subsistence of the factor, . - . . 




365 00 
35,669 66 


1812. 


Cr. 






March 


31, 


By amount of capital stock at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, at cost, - - . . . 
Furs and peltries, at cost, - . . . 
Cash. .---.. 
Debts due, - - - 

Buildings, at cost, - . - - . 
Furniture, at cost, ----- 


8,736 50 

1,147 58 

30 90| 

886 43| 
2,239 97 

200 00 






13,241 39 




March 


31, 


By amount received for furs and peltries sold, - - - 


203 57 




March 


31, 


By amount received in cash and drafts. 


500 75 




March 


31, 


By amount paid at the trading-house in part salary to agent, and reim- 
bursed at the Treasury, . - - . 


515 00 




March 


31, 


By amount of furs, peltries, &c. remaining in store unsold, estimated at 
Balance, being estimated loss this year, - 


17,574 77 


32,035 48 




- 




$3,634 18 



B/. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Chicago, from- 

Slst March, 1811, to Ist April, 1812. 



1811. 


Dr. 








April 1, 


To amount of capital stock at the trading-house: 










Merchandise, at cost, - . . . 


$5,630 62 






Furs and peltries, at cost, . - .. - 


3,940 


lOA 






Debts due, - - . . - 


838 


30A 






Cash, ------ 


330 


71 






Furniture and contingent articles, ... 


228 


94 






Buildings, estimated at - - - - 
To amount of furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at - 


500 


00 


$11,468 68 
94 07 


April 1, 


- 




1812. 










March 31, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 










since April I, - - - - - 


- 




5,097 06 


March 31, 


To expenses of transportation and other incidental charges, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at different places, and a due proportion 










of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office. 


- 




1,760 44 


March 31, 


To subsistence of the factor, . . . . 
Cr. 


■ 




365 00 


1812. 


18,785 25 


March 31, 


By amount ot stock on hand at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, furs, cash, &c. - - - $12,472 04| 
Debts due, - . . - 510 71| 
Furniture, - - - - 134 31 
Contingent articles, - - - 110 071 
Buildings, estimated at - - - 500 00 


13,727 


15 










March 31, 


By amount received for furs and peltries sold. 


85 


06 




March 31, 


By amount received in cash and drafts. 


945 


35 




March 31, 


By amount of furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at 


5,801 


63 


20,559 19 
$1,773 94 




Balance, being estimated gain this year. 


- 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



41 



Annual accmtnt particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Michilimacki- 
nac,from 3\st March, 1811, to 1st April, 1812. 



Apri 



1812 
Marcli 



March 
March 



1812. 
March 31, 



March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the trading-house, viz: 

Merchandise, furs, &c. at cost, - - - . 

Debts due, . . - . . 

Furniture, . - - - . 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since April 1, cost . - . - - 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental charges, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at different places, interpreters, and a due 
proportion of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office. 
To subsistence of the factor from 1st April last to this date, 

Cr. 

By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house, viz: 
Merchandise, ... 

Debts due, ... 

Cash, ... - 

Furniture, ... 

By amount received in cash and drafts. 



Balance, being estimated gain this year. 



19,810 87 

2,746 44 

404 00 

200 00 



$11,658 08 

5,124 46 

200 00 



13,101 31 
8,965 76 



616,982 54 
1.965 30 



810 91 
365 00 



20,123 75 



22,127 07 



$2,003 32 



B /*. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Sandusky, 
from 31s< March, 1811, to \st April, 1812. 



1811. 
April 1, 



April 1, 

1812. 
March 31, 

March 31, 



March 31, 



1812. 
March 31, 
March 31, 

March 31, 



March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock on hand at the factory at this date, viz: 

Merchandise, ... - $1,479 lOJ 

Buildings, - - - - 854 65 

Furs, peltries, &c. - - - - 1,499 81i 

Cash, - - - - - 102 24 

Bills receivable, - - - - 116 37i 

Debts due, - - - - 573 33i 

To amount of furs, peltries, &c. remaining unsold in the stores of the su- 
perintendent, and in the hands of agents, at this date, estimated at - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from superintendent's office since 
1st April last, cost - - . - . 

To expense of transportation, and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving furs and peltries at diiferent places, interpret- 
ers, and due proportion of contingent expenses at superintendent's 
office, estimated at - - - - - 

To amount of subsistence of the factor and clerk, from the 1st April last 
to this date, . . . . - 

Cr. 

By amount received for furs, peltries, &c., sold. 

By amount of furs, peltries, &c. in store for sale at this date, estimated 
at - - - - _ - 

By amount of stock on hand at factory at this date, viz: 

Merchandise, .... $3,550 58 

Buildings, - - - - 854 65 

Cash, - - - - - 73 38i 

Furs and peltries, ... - - 1,417 33 

Debts, - - - - - 726 75 



By amount paid at the factory in part of agents' salaries, and reimbursed 
by the Treasury, from 1st April, 1811, to this date, 



Total lost in trade this year, 



$4,625 52 
1,749 84 

3,541 86 

1,293 88 
302 50 



1,895 27 
1,028 00 



6,622 69i 
174 51 



$11,513 60 



9,720 47 



$1,793 13 



42 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



B i. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried, on at the United States trading-house at Fort Hawkins, 
from 31st March, 1811, to 1st April, 1812. 



1811. 


Dr. 






April 1, 


To amount of capital stock at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, ... - $4,845 10 
Cash, ----- 1,343 39 
Furs and peltries, - . - - 6,935 87* 
Buildings, - - - - 470 28i 
Debts due, - - - - 571 86* 






1812. 




$14,166 51* 








March 31, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 








since April 1, - 


2,533 87 




March 31, 


To expenses of transportation and other incidental expenses, labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at various places, and a due proportion 








ol contingent expenses at the superintendent's office. 


800 48 











$17,500 86i 


1812. 


Cr. 






March 31, 


By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, implements, &c. - - - $4,746 40^ 
Furs and peltries, - - - . 8,238 95 
Cash. ----- 2,403 05J 
Buildings, - - -. - 514 72^ 
Debts due, - - - - 55 98 


15,958 lU 




March 31, 


By amount of salaries of factor and assistant, paid at the trading-house. 






and reimbursed by the Treasury, - - - - 


1.500 00 






Balance, being estimated loss this year. 




17,458 lis 




- 




$42 75 



ANNUAL ACCOUNT GENERAL. 



The United States trading-houses for the Indian trade, carried on at them all, from Slst March, 1812, to \st 

April, 1813. 



March 31, 1813, 



March 31, 1813, 



March 31, 1813, 



Drs. 

Chickasaw trading -house. Amount debits this year, per statement C a, 
Choctaw trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement C b, 
Des Moines trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement C c, 
Osage trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement C rf, 
Natchitoches trading- house. Amount debits this year, per statement C e, 
Chicago trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement C /, 
Michilimackinac trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement C , 
Sandusky trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement C h. 
Fort Hawkins trading-house. .Amount debits this year, per statement C i. 



Balance, 



Amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy this year, per statement F m: 

Des Moines trading-house. Amount taken or destroyed, - ' - 

Michilimackinac trading-house. Amount taken or destroyed, 
Chicago trading-house. Amount taken or destroyed, - - . 

Sandusky trading-house. Amount taken or destroyed. 



To final balance, deducting losses by the enemy, 

Crs. 
Chickasaw trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement C a, 
Choctaw trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement C b, 
Des Moines trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement C c, 
Osage trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement C rf, - 
Natchitoches trading-house, Amount credits this year, per statement C e, 
Chicago trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement C /, 
Michilimackinac trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement C g, 
Sandusky trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement C A, 
Fort Hawkins trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement C i, 



Balance gained in trade, - 
Balance, 



$26,774 28 
32,241 80 
35,270 94 
33,982 06 
37,871 14 
20,375 04 
13,905 89 
8,146 10 
16,200 18 



224,767 43 
7,397 49 



$232,164 92 



$5,500 00 
12,961 31 
13,074 47 
6,333 83 



$37,869 61 



$30,472 12 



$31,908 14 
32,396 90 
39,600 23 
37,352 02 
42,509 34 
20,172 26 
13,377 61 
8,219 63 
16,628 80 



$232,164 92 



$7,397 49 
30,472 12 

$37,869 61 



1S16.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



C o. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Chickasaw 
Bluffs, from Slst March, 1812, to \st April, 1813. 



1812. 
April 1, 


April 

18i: 
March 


1, 
31, 


March 


31,. 


March 


31, 


1813 
March 


31, 


March 
March 


31, 
31, 


March 


31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the trading-house, as shown in statement 

marked B o, - 

To amount of furs, peltries, &c. in store, unsold, estimated at 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since the 1st April last, . . . . 

To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at different places, and due proportion 
of the contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, - 

To subsistence of the factor and assistant, ... 

Cr. 
By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house, viz: 
Merchandise, - . - 

Furniture, &c., ... 
Cash, - - - - 

Debts due, .... 

Buildings, estimated at 



- $3,021 29 

239 97i 
83 

- 3,386 13i 

100 00 



By amount received for furs, &c. sold. - . . 

By amount paid at the trading-house in part salary of agents, and reim- 
bursed by the Treasury, . . . . 
By amount of furs, peltries. Sac. remaining in store unsold, estimated at 



Balance, being the estimated loss this year, 



$13,170 96 
12,801 76 



513 72 

287 84 



26,774 28 



21,908 14J 



$4,866 13 



C b. 



Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States Choctaio trading-house, from 

31s< March, 1812, to \st April, 1813. 



1812. 


Dr. 






-\pril 1, 


To amount of capital stock at the trading-house, as shown in state- 








ment B 6, 


$18,778 83 




April 1, 


To amount of furs and peltries remaining unsold in the hands of agents. 








estimated at - - - . - 


7,664 56 




1813. 








March 31, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 








since April 1st, - - . . . 


4,598 08 




March 31, 


To expenses of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at different places, and a due propor- 








tion ot contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, 


1,300 33 


$32,241 80 






1813. 


Cr. 






March 31, 


By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house, viz: 

Merchandise, .... $3,504 55 
Peltries, - . - - - 11,068 42i 
Cash, . - - - . 2,256 03 
Debts, - - - - - 3,750 64 


20,579 63^ 
2,348 53 




March 31, 


By amount received for furs and peltries sold, - 




March 31, 


By amount of salaries ot the agent and assistant, paid at the trading- 








house, and reimbursed by the Treasury, ... 


1,500 00 


' 


March 31, 


By amount ot furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at 


7,968 74 






Balance, being the estimated gain this year, 




32,396 90i 




- 




$155 10 



44 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



Cc. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Des Moines, from 31s< 

March, 1812, to \st April, 1813. 



1812. 
April 1, 
April 1, 

1813. 
March 31, 

iMarch 31, 

March 31, 



1813. 
Marcli 31, 
March 31, 



March 31, 

March 31, 

March 31, 

March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the factory, as shown in statement Be, 
To amount of peltries, &c. remaining unsold in the stores of the superin- 
tendent, and in the hands of agents, at this date, estimated at 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since 1st April, cost - - - - - 

To amount of subsistence of factor and assistant factor from 1st April last 
to this date, ..... 

To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving furs and peltries at different places, interpret- 
ers, and due proportion of contingent expenses at superintendent's of- 
fice, estimated at - 

Cr. 
By amount received for furs, peltries, &c. sold, - 
By amount of capital stock at factory, this date, viz: 

Merchandise, 

Debts due, ... 

Cash, - - - - 

By amount received in cash and drafts, 

By amount of furs, peltries, &c. in store for sale at this date, estimated at 

By amount paid at the factory in part of agents' salaries, and reimbursed 
by the Treasury, from April I, 1811, to this date, 

By amount of loss sustained by the destruction of the factory buildings by 
the Indians, which is not included in amount of capital stock on hand 
at this date, as per statement, ..... 



Balance, being estimated gain in trade this year. 
Deduct for loss, as credited above, - 

Balance, being estimated total loss this year, 



$7,860 76 
3,563 80^ 
217 42J 



$12,041 94 

11,641 99 

800 00 

9,145 09 

471 31 

5,500 00 



$22,709 16 


4,309 79 


5,502 47 


468 99 



2,280 53 



35,270 94 



39,600 23 



4,329 29 
5,500 00 



1,170 71 



Cd. 

Annual account particidar of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Fort Osage, from 

3lst March, 1812, to 1st April, 1813. 



1812. 
April 1, 

1813. 
March 31, 



1813. 
March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the factory, as shown in statement B rf, - 
To amount of furs and peltries remaining unsold in the stores of the super, 
intendent, and in the hands of agents, at this date, 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's oflSce 
since 1st April last, cost .... 

To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving furs and peltries at different places, interpret- 
ers, and due proportion of contingent expenses at the superintendent's 
office, estimated at - 

To amount of subsistence of the factor and assistant from 1st April last to 
this date, ------ 

Cr. 

By amount received for furs, peltries, &c. sold, - - - 

By amount of furs, peltries, &c. in store for sale at this date, estimated at 
By amount of stock on hand at factory, viz: 

Merchandise, &c. - - - $12,899 90 

Furs and peltries, .... 4,040 68 
Buildings, •• . - . 2,450 00 

Debts due, - . . - i,319 07^ 



By amount paid at the factory in part of agents' salaries, and reimbursed 
by the Treasury, from 1st April last to this date. 



Balance, being estimated gain this year, 



$5,052 39 
10,594 70 



20,709 65 
995 28 



$22,923 64 
4,222 74 

4,486 44 

1,835 24 
515 00 



33,962 06 



37,352 02 



$3,369 96 



]816.] 



TRADE AND IiNTERCOURSE. 



45 



C e. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Natchitoches, 
from 31st March, 1812, to 1st April, 1813. 



1813. 
April 1, 
April 1, 

1813. 
March 31, 

Marcii 31, 
March 31, 



1813. 
March 31, 



March 31, 

March 31, 

March 31, 

March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the tradiiig-iiouse, as shown in statement B e, 
To amount of furs and peltries remainins in store unsold, estimated at - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since April 1st, 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental charges, as labor 
and store rent, in pieserving skins in ditferent places, and a due pro- 
portion of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office. 

To subsistence of the factor, - •• - $365 00 

Less amount paid the factor at the trading-house, - 23 75 



$6,291 59 

1,091 16 

56 87 

19 78J 

866 90i 

2,239 97 

200 00 



Cr. 

By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 
Merchandise, at cost. 
Furs and peltries, at cost, 

Bills receivable, . - . 

Cash, - - - - 

Debts, - - - - 

Buildings, at cost, - - - 

Furniture, at cost, - - - 

By amount received for furs and peltries sold, - - - 

By amount of merchandise returned to this office. 
By amount paid at the trading-house, the salary of the agent, and reim- 
bursed by the Treasury, . . . . 
By furs, peltries, &c. remaining in store unsold, estimated at 



Balance, being estimated gain this year. 



$13,241 39 
17,574 77 



5,223 74 

1,489 99 

341 25 



10,766 28 

9,080 38 

250 24 

1,000 00 
21,412 44 



37,871 14 



42,509 34 



$4,638 20 



c/. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Chicago, from 
3lst March, 1812, to 3lst December, 1812. 



1812. 
April 1, 
April 1, 
Dec. 31, 



Dec 31, 



1812, 
Dec. 
Dec. 
Dec. 



Dec. 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock atthe trading-house, as shown in statement B^^ 

To amount of furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental charges, as labor and 

store rent, in preserving skins at different places, and a due proportion 

of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, 
To subsistence of the factor, . - - . 

Cr. 

By amount received for furs and peltries sold. 

By amount received in cash and drafts, . . . 

By amount paid the factor at the trading-house, in partof salary, and reim- 
bursed by the Treasury, - . . - 

By amount of property of various kinds taken or destroyed by the enemy, 
as shown in statement marked F ot, 



Balance, being loss in trade this year. 
Add amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy, as above, 

Total loss, - - - 



$13,727 15 
5,801 63 




572 51 
273 75 


$20,375 04 




5,801 63 
780 67 




515 49 




13,074 47 


20,172 26 




- 


202 78 
13,074 47 


- 


$13,277 25 



46 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Michilimackinac, 
from March 31 <o December 31, 1812. 



1812. 
April 1, 
Dec. 31, 



Dec. 31, 



1812. 
Dec. 31, 
Dec. 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the trading-house, as shown in statement Bg-, 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental chaiges, as labor and 

store rent, in preserving skins at different places, interpreters, and a 

due proportion of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, - 

To subsistence of the factor, from April 1 to this date. 



Cr. 

By amount received in cash and drafts, . . . 

By amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy during the war, 
as shown in statement marked F m. 

Balance, being estimated loss in trade this year. 

Add amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy, as credited 
above, -.--.. 

Total estimated loss of the factory this year. 



$13,1GI 31 



- 


470 83 


- 


273 75 




13,905 89 


$416 30 




12,961 31 






13,377 61 




- 


528 28 


- 


12,961 31 


- 


813,489 59 



C/i. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Sanduslcy,from 

March 31 to December 31, 1812. 



1812. 
April 1, 

April 1, 

Dec. 31, 



Dec. 



1812. 
Dec. 31, 



Dec. 
Dec. 



Dec. 31, 
Dec. 31, 
Dec. 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of property on hand at the factory at this date, as shown in 
statement B A, - - - - 

To amount of furs, peltries, &c. remaining unsold in the stores of the 
superintendent, and in the hands of agents, at this date, estimated at - 

To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, preserving furs and peltries at diflerent places, interpreters, 
and due proportion of contingent expenses at superintendent's office, 
estimated at - 

To amount of subsistence of the factor, from 1st of April last to this date, 



Cr. 

By amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy, as shown in 

statement A A, - - - - S3,821 72 

By buildings burnt by the enemy, estimated at - - 814 65 

By amount of furs and peltries taken by the British at the 

surrender of Detroit, belonging to this factory, invoiced by 

the factor at - - - - 1,697 46 



By amount received for furs and peltries sold, - - - 

By amount received in cash and drafts, - - - 

By amount paid out of factory fund in part of agent's salary, and reim- 
bursed by the Treasury since 1st of April last. 



Balance gained in trade from 1st of April to this date, 

To amount of property destroyed by the enemy, as credited above. 



Total loss this year, 



$6,622 69 
1,028 00 



292 91 
202 50 



6,333 83 

1,028 00 

235 00 

622 79 



8,146 10 



8,219 62 



73 52 
6,333 83 



6,260 31 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



47 



a. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade earned on at the .United States trading-house at Fort Hawkins, 
from March 31, 1812, <o April 1, 1813. 



1812. 
April 1, 

1813. 
March 31, 



1813. 
March 31, 



March 31, 



Dr. 

To.amount of capital stock at the trading-house, as shown in statement B i, 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at ditt'erent places, and a due proportion 
of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, 

Cr. 
By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, implements, &c. - - - 

Peltries, - - - - - 

Cash, - - - - - 
Buildings, .... 

Debts due, . . - . 

19,490 59J 
Deduct debts due from the trading-house for blankets pur- 
chased at Amelia Island, - - - 4,361 79 

By amount of salaries of the factor and assistant, paid at the trading- 
house, and reimbursed at the Treasury, . „ . 



Balance, being estimated gain this year. 



N,943 15| 

8,992 51i 

3,475 IbA 

720 811 

1,358 92| 



$15,958 111 



242 07 



15,128 80i 
1,500 00 



$16,200 18i 



16,628 80* 
$428 62 



ANNUAL ACCOUNT GENERAL. 



The United States trading-houses for the Indian trade, carried on at them all, from March 31, 1813, to 

April 1, 1814. 



March 31, 1814, 



March 31, 1814, 



Drs. 

Chickasaw trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement D a, 
Choctaw trading-house- Amount debits this year, per statement D b, 
Des Moines trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement D c, 
Osage trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement D d, - 
Natchitoches trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement D e, 
Fort Hawkins trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement D j^ 
Fort Wayne trading-house. Amount debits this year, per statement D g. 



Amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy, as per statement F m: 
Fort Wayne trading-house, - - - . 

Crs. 
Chickasaw trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement D a, 
Choctaw trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement D b, 
Des Moines trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement D c, 
Osage trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement D d, - 
Natchitoches trading- house. Amount credits this year, per statement D e. 
Fort Hawkins trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement D/, 
Fort Wayne trading-house. Amount credits this year, per statement D g, 



Balance gained in trade. 

Deduct amount of property destroyed by the enemy, 

Final balance. 



$24,392 43 
34,836 81 
30,725 93 
43,921 53 
39,201 86 
15,308 06 
20.967 64 



$209,354 26 



$5,500 00 



$23,460 70 
33,749 39 
40,426 93 
44,173 74 
40,789 76 
15,951 69 
21,134 18 



$218,686 39 
209,354 26 



9,333 13 
5,500 00 

S3,832 13 



48 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



D a. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at ChicJcasan 
Bluffs, from 31st March, 1813, to Ist April, 1814. 



1813. 
April 1, 
April 1, 

1814. 
March 31, 

March 31, 
March 31, 



1814. 
March 31, 



Marcli 31, 
March 31. 



March 31, 



Dr. 

Ti) amount of capital stock on hand at the tradins-house, as shown in C a. 
To amount of furs, peltries, &c., in store unsold, estimated at 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since the 1st of April last, - . . . . 

To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor, 
store rent, preserving skins in different places, and due proportion of the 
contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, - 

To subsistence of the factor, - - . . . 



Cr. 

By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 
Merchandise, .... 

Furs and peltries, - - - . 

Debts due, - - - . 

Cash. - - . . . 

Furniture, &c., - - . . 

Buildings, estimated at - - - 

By amount received for furs and peltries sold, . . . 

By amount paid at the trading-house in part of salary of agent, and reim- 
bursed at the Treasury, -...,. 
By amount of furs, peltries, &c., remaining in store unsold, estimated at - 

Balance, being estimated loss this year, 



$2,149 07? 
2,767 41 
3,356 81i 
9 074 
300 00 
100 00 



$8,582 37| 
869 98 

140 73 
13,867 C3 



86,748 23J 
8,701 42 



6,306 30 



2,335 73 
300 75 

$24,392 43^ 



23,460 70| 



31 73 



D b. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States Choctaw trading-house, from 31sf 

March, 1813, to ^st April, 1814. 



1813. 
April 1, 

April 1, 

1814. 
March 31, 

March 31, 



1814. 
March 31, 



March 31, 
March 31, 



March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the trading-house, as shown in statement 

C 6, - 

To amount of furs and peltries remaining unsold in the hands of agents, 

estimated at - - - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 

since the 1st of April, - - - . . 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor, 

store rent, in preserving skins in difterent places, and a due proportion 

of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, 

Cr. 
By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, - . . . $4,078 64 

Peltries, .... 12,021 96| 

Cash, ..... 1^484 53 

Bills receivable, - . - . 204 60 

Debts, - . . . 5,146 69i 

By amount received for furs and peltries sold, 

By amount of salaries of agent and assistant, paid at the trading-house, 

and reimbursed by the Treasury, . _ . . 

By amount of furs and peltries remaining unsold in store, estimated at - 



Balance, being estimated loss this year. 



$20,579 63J 
7,968 74 
4,215 20 

2,073 24 



22,936 43 
1,826 85 



1,500 00 
6,486 11 



$34,836 81 i 



32,749 39 



$2,C87 424 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



49 



Be. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Des Mnines,frnm 

3lsf March, 1813, to 1st April, 1814. 



1813. 


Dr. 






April 


1, 


To amount of capital stock on hand at the factory at this date, as shown 
in C c, - 




$11,641 99 


April 


1, 


To amount of peltries, &c. remaining unsold in the stores of the superin- 
tendent, and in the hands of agents, at this date, estimated at 


. 


9,145 09 


1814. 








March 


31, 


To amount of merchandise from superintendent's office since 1st April 
last, cost ------ 




6,218 75 


March 


31, 


To expense of transportation, and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving furs and peltries at different places, inter- 
preters, and due proportion of contingent expenses at superintendent's 
office, estimated at - 




3,205 10 


March 


31, 


To amount of subsistence of the factor and assistant factor, from 1st of 










April last to this date, ... - 




515 00 




$30,725 93 


IBU 


. 


Cr. 






March 


31, 


By amount received for furs and peltries sold, - - - 


$8,013 25 




March 


31, 


By amount of stock on hand at factory this date, viz: 

Merchandise, - . .. . $8,819 15 
Furs, peltries, &c. - - - - 9,209 00 
Debts due, .... 2,432 40| 
Cash, - - - - - 130 89 


20,591 44 










March 


31, 


By amount paid at the factory in part of agents' salaries, and reimbursed 
by the Treasury, from 1st April last to this date, 


230 37 




March 


31, 


By amount received in cash and drafts. 


1,696 78 




March 


31, 


By amount of furs, peltries, &c. in store for sale, estimated at 


9,895 09 








Balance, being estimated gain this year. 


- 


40,426 93 




$9,701 00 



Dd. 

Annual account particular of the trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Fort Osage, from 3lst 

3Iarch, 1813, to Ist April, 1814. 



1813. 
April 1, 
April 1, 

1814. 
March 31, 

March 31, 



March 31, 



1814. 
March 31, 
March 31, 
March 31, 
March 31, 



March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the factory, as shown in statement C rf, - 

To amount of furs, peltries, &c. remaining unsold in the stores of the 

superintendent, and in the hands of agents, at this date, estimated at 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since the 1st of April last, cost . - . - 

To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving furs and peltries at different places, inter- 
preters, and due proportion of contingent expenses at superintendent's 
office, estimated ut - 

To amount of subsistence of the factor and assistant factor, from 1st April 
last to this date, . . - . - 

Cr. 

By amount received for furs, peltries, &c. sold, - - - 

By amount received in cash and drafts, - - - 

By amount of furs, peltries, &c. in store for sale at this date, estimated at 
By amount of stock on hand at factory, viz: 

Merchandise, &c. .... $12,997 84 
Furs and peltries, - - - - 4,147 75 

Debts, ----- 1,708 17 



By amount paid at the factory in part of agent's salary, and reimbursed 
by the Treasury, from 1st April last to this date, 



Balance, being estimated gain this year, 



$14,672 64 
3,480 00 
6,685 37 



18,853 76 
481 97 



820,709 65 
10,594 70 

7,872 33 

4,238 58- 
506 27 



$43,921 53- 



44,173 74. 



$252 21 



50 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



D e. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Natchitoches, 
from 31st March, 1813, to 1st April, 1814. 



1813. 
April 1, 

April 1, 

1814. 
March 31, 

March 31, 



1814. 
March 31, 



March 31, 

March 31, 

March 31, 

March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock on hand at the trading-house, as shown in 

statement C e, - 

To amount of furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since April 1, - - - - - 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental charges, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at dift'erent places, and a due proportion 
of the contingent e&penses at the superintendent's office, - 

Cr. 
By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, at cost, - - - - $2,116 00 

Furs and peltries, at cost, ... 591 53 

Buildings, at cost, . - .. . 2,239 97 

Furniture, at cost, - - - - 200 00 

Cash, - - - - - 524 20^ 

Debts, ----- 1,042 43J 



By amount received for furs and peltries sold, - 
By amount received in cash and drafts. 

By amount of salary of the factor, paid at the trading -house, and reim- 
bursed by the Treasury, . . - . 
By amount of furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at 



Balance, estimated gain this year. 



$10,766 28 
21,412 44 



4,243 79 
2,779 35 



6,704 14 

323 64 

1,628 50 

1,000 00 
31,133 48 



$39,201 8G 



40,789 76 



$1,587 90 



D/. 

Annual account ■particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Fort Haivkins, 
from 3ist March, 1813, to 1st April, 1814. " 



1813. 
April 1, 

1814. 
March 31, 



1814. 
March 31, 



March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the trading-house, as shown in statement C i. 

To expenses of transportationland other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at different places, and a due proportion 
of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, 

Cr. 

By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 
Merchandise, implements, &c. 
Peltries, - - - - 

Cash, - - - - 

Buildings, cost of, - 
Debts due, - - - 



$1,315 48i 

9,031 82i 

1,937 88 

727 31| 

1,705 545 

$14,718 04| 
266 35 



Deduct debts due from the trading-house. 

By amount of salaries of the factor and assistant, paid at the trading-house, 
and reimbursed by the Treasury, - - - - 



Balance, being estimated gain this year. 



$15,128 80 



14,451 69f 
1,500 00 



$15,308 06 



15,951 69i 



$643 63^ 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



51 



Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-hotise at Fort Wayne, 
from Slst March, 1811, to 1st April, 1814. 



1811. 
April 1, 



April 
April 



1812. 
March 31, 

1814. 
March 31, 



1814. 
March 31, 

March 31, 
March 31, 



March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of property on hand at the factory, per factor's account this 
date, viz: 
Merchandise, peltries, &c. .... 

Cash, ------ 

Debts due, . . . - . 

Buildings, - . . - - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from superintendent's office which 

had not reached the factory at this date. 
To amount of furs and peltries remaining unsold in the superintendent's 

stores, and in the hands of agents, at this date, estimated at 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from superintendent's office since 
1st April last, cost . - - - - 

To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving furs and peltries at diiferent places, interpret- 
ers, and due proportion of contingent expenses at the superintendent's 
office, estimated at - 

To amount of subsistence of the factor and clerk from 1st April, 1811, to 
31st December, 1813, - . . . 

Cr. 

By amount received for furs and peltries sold from 1st April, 1811, to 
this date, - - - - - . - 

By amount received in cash and drafts, from 1st April. 1811, to this date. 

By amount paid atthe factory, in part of agent and clerk's salaries, and 
reimbursed by the Treasury, from 1st April, 1811, to this date, 

By amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy, as shown in 
statement F m, - 



Balance, being estimated gain in trade from 1st April, 1811, to this date, 

To amount ol property takew or destroyed by the enemy during the late 

war, as shown above, - - - - - 

Balance, being total amount of estimated loss. 



$8,797 93 
7G 374 
2,747 564 
500 00 



$12,121 87 
2,024 93 
1,813 92 

2,904 92 



- 


1,292 00 


- 


810 00 




20,967 64 


4,405 61 
10,783 56 




445 01 




5,500 00 


21.134 18 




- 


$166 54 


- 


5,500 00 



5,333 46 



Note. — This factory was broken up by the Indians in October, 1812, the whole period of its existence being 
only about eighteen months; and, because of its immediate vicinity to the seat of war, the usual quarterly returns 
not having been regularly made, but one account in the nature of an annual account is rendered, and this is brought 
into the general statement of the year after, because most of its accounts were not wound up until then. 



ANNUAL ACCOUNT GENERAL. 

The United States tradiug-kouses for the Indian trade, carried on at them all, from March 31, 1814, to April 

1, 1815. 



March 31, 1815, 



Drs. 

Chickasaw trading-hoase. Amount of debits this year, per statement E a, 
Choctaw trading-house. Amount of debits this year, per statement E 6, 
Des Moines trading-house. Amount of debits this year, per statement E c, 
Osage trading-house. Amount of debits this year, per statement E d, 
Natchitoches trading-house. Amount of debits this year, per statement E e, 
Fort Hawkins trading-house. Amount of debits this year, per statement E f, 



Balance, 



Recapitulation. 



Amount of debits, per account marked B, 
Amount of debits, per account marked C, 
Amount of debits, per account marked D, 
Amount of debits, per account marked E, 



Balance, 



Amount 



of property taken or destroyed by the enemy during th 

Balance, 



the vifar. 



$239,688 89 



$27,944 90 J 
39,461 39 

40.641 95 
37,046 58 
45,666 44 

14.642 69^ 



205,403 96 
34,284 93 



$229,970 59 

224.767 43 

209,354 26 

205,403 96 

55,797 48 



$925,293 72 



$43,369 61 
12,427 87 

$55,797 48 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



E— Continued. 



March 31, 1815, 



Crs. 
Cliickasiiw tradins-house. Amount of credits this year, per statement R a, 
Choctaw trading-house. Amount of credits this year, per statement E b, 
Des Moines trading-house. Amount of credits this year, per statement E c, 
Osage trading-house. Amount of credits this year, per statement E rf, 
Natchitoches trading-house. Amount of credits this year, per statement E e. 
Fort Hawkins trading-house. Amount of credits this year, per statement E/, 



Balance gained iti trade, 

Recapiiiilaiion. 
Amount of credits, per account marked B, - 
Amount of credits, per account marked C, 
Amountof credits, per account marked D, 
Amount of credits, per account marked E, 



Balance gained in trade. 

By final balance, deducting losses by the enemy. 



S40,377 
44,657 
40,565 
45,777 
55,077 
13,23-2 


84 
64 
79 
42 
89 
31 


8239,688 89 


$34,284 93 


$234,753 
232,164 
216,686 
239,688 


52 
92 
39 

89 


925,293 


72 


$55,797 48 



12,427 87 



E a. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Chickasaw Bluffs, 

from March 31, 1814, to April 1, 1815. 



1814 


. 


Dr. 






April 


1, 


To amount of capital stock on hand at the trading-house, as shown in 










statement D a, - 


. 


$8,582 37i' 


April 


1, 


To amount of furs, peltries, &c. remaining in store unsold, estimated at - 


. 


13,867 63 


1815 










March 


31, 


To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since 1st of April last, - - - - - 




3,634 31 


March 


31, 


To expenses ot transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor, 
store rent, preserving skins in diflerent places, and due proportion of 










the contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, 


- 


1,860 59 


1815. 


Cr. 




27,944 90i 


March 


31, 


By an\ount of stock on hand at trading-house: 

Merchandise, - - - - $2,414 72J 
Furs and peltries, - - - - 205 19 
Debts, - - - - 2,356 81i 
Buildings, estimated at - - - 1,100 00 


$6,076 73 




March 


31, 


By amount received for furs and peltries sold, - 


7,187 43 




March 


31, 


By amount received in cash and dratts, - . . 


2,301 45 




March 


31, 


By amount paid at the trading-house, in part salary to agents, and reim- 
bursed by the Treasury, - . _ . 


1,000 00 




March 


31, 


By amount ot furs, peltries, &c. remaining in store unsold, estimated at - 
Balance, being the estimated gain this year. 


23,812 23 


40.377 84 




- 




$12,432 93 



E h. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States Choctaw trading-house at Fort 
St Stephen's, from 3lst Jflarch, 1814, «o 1st April, 1815. 



1814. 


Dr. 






April 1, 


To amount of capital stock at the trading-house, as shown in statement D b. 


$22,936 43 




April 1, 


To amount of furs and peltries remaining unsold in the hands of agents, 






1815. 


estimated at ---... 


6,486 11 




March 31, 


To amount of merchandise for\yarded from the superintendent's office 








since April 1st, --.... 


8,246 94 




March 31, 


To expense of transportatiori and other incidental expenses, as labor, 
store rent, in preserving skins in different places, and a due proportion 








of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, 


1,791 91 


$39,461 39 






1815. 


Cr. 






March 31, 


By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 

Merchandise, - . . _ $5,825 48 
Peltries, ----- 17,694 70 
Cash, - . - . . 4,676 72 
Bills receivable, - - - - 273 10 
Debts, - ... - 7,501 53 


35,971 53 










March 31, 


By amount received in cash and drafts, - - - . 


700 00 




Marcii 31, 


By amount of salaries of agent and assistant, paid at the trading-house. 








and reimbursed by the Treasury, .... 


1,500 00 




March 31, 


By amount ot furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at - 


6,486 11 










44,657 64 




Balance, being estimated gain this year, 


- 


$5,196 25 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



53 



Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Des Moines, 
from 31s< March, 1814, to 1st April, 1815. 



1814. 
April 1, 

April 1, 

1815. 
March 31, 

March 31, 



March 31, 



1815. 
March 31, 



March 31, 
March 31, 
March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock on hand at the factory, as shown in statement 
D e, - - -..-.- 

To amount of furs and peltries remaining unsold in the stores of the su- 
perintendent, and in the hands of agents, at this date, estimated at _ - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since the 1st of April last, cost - - 

To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving furs and peltries at different places, interpret- 
ers, and due proportion of contingent expenses at the superintendent's 
office, estimated at - - - - 

To amount of subsistence of the factor and assistant, from the 1st of April 
last to this date, ...... 



$12,301 73 
4,G8G 47 



Cr. 
By amount of capital stock on hand at this date: 
Merchandise and implements. 
Debts due, .... 

By amount received for furs and peltries sold, 

By amount received in cash antl drafts. 

By amount of furs, peltries, &c. in stoie for sale, at this date, estimated at 



Balance, being estimated loss this year, 



$16,988 20 

11,269 16 

1,500 00 

10,808 43 



$20,591 


44 


9,895 


09 


7,974 


30 


1,666 


12 


515 


00 


40,641 


95 



40,565 79 
$76 16 



E d. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Fort Osage, 
from 31st March, 1814, to 1st April, 1815. 



1814. 
April 1, 
April 1, 



June 



30, 



1815. 
March 31, 



March 31, 



March 31, 



1815. 
March 31, 



March 31, 

March 31, 

March 31, 

-March 31, 



March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the factory, as shown in the statement D d. 

To amount of furs, peltries. &c. remaining unsold in the stores of the su- 
perintendent, and in the hands of agents, at this date, 

To amount of property lost by sinking of a barge from the Arrow Rock, 
with goods, furs, and peltries on board, as per the factor's statement 
of this date, - - - - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since the 1st of April last, - - 

To expense of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving furs and peltries, and due proportion of con- 
tingent expenses at the superintendent's office, estimated at - 

To amount of subsistence of the factor from the 1st of April last to this 
date, -.--... 



Cr. 
By amount of properly lost by sinking of barge, as charged above, not 
being included in the capital stock on hand at this date, must now be 
credited, -.-.... 
By amount received in cash and drafts, . .. - - 

By amount received for furs, peltries, &c. sold, . - . 

By amount of furs, peltries, &c. in store, for sale at this date, estimated at 
By amount of stock on hand at the factory, viz: 

Merchandise, .... $9,869 75 

Debts, ..... 140 71| 

Buildings, .... 2,543 60J 



By amountpaidat the factory in part of agent's salary, and reimbursed by 
the Treasury, from 1st April, 1814, to this date, - . . 



Balance, being estimated gain this year. 



$1,324 83 
15,707 34 
10,712 21 
4,796 48 



12,554 07 
682 50 



$18,853 


76 


6,685 


37 


1,324 


82 


8,041 


87 


1,775 


76 


365 


00 



37,046 58 



3,730 84 



Ee. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Natchitoches, 
from 31st March, 1814, to \st April, 1815. 



1814. 
April 1, 

April 1, 

1815. 
March 31, 

March 31, 



To amount of capital stock on hand at the trading-house, per statement 

D e, . 

To amount of furs and peltries remaining in store unsold, estimated at - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office 
since April Ist, at cost, .... 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental charges, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at different places, and a due proportion 
of the contingent expenses at the superintendent's office. 



$6,704 14 
31,133 48 



6,163 98 
1,664 84 



$45,666 44 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



E e — Continued. 



1815. 
March 31, 



March 31, 

March 31, 

March 31, 

March 31, 



$5,386 8.'J 

8,265 25 

2,239 97 

200 00 

4,598 15| 

108 73i 

474 41 



Cr. 

By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 
Merchandise, at cost. 

Furs and peltries, . - - 

Buildings, - 

Furniture, ... 

Bills of exchange, . - - 

Cash, . - - - 

Debts, - - . - 

By amount received for furs and peltries sold, . - - 

By amount received for cash and drafts, - - - 

By amount of salary of the factor paid at the trading house, and reim- 
bursed by the Treasury, 
Amount of furs, peltries, &.c. remaining in store unsold, estimated at 



Balance, being estimated gain this year. 



$21,273 35 

11,833 17 

1,671 06 

1,000 00 
19,301 31 



55,077 89 
$9,411 45 



£/. 

Annual account particular of the Indian trade carried on at the United States trading-house at Fort Hawkins, 
from Slst March, 1814, to 1st April, 1815. 



1814. 
April 1, 

1815. 
March 31, 



1815. 
March 31, 



March 31, 



Dr. 

To amount of capital stock at the trading-house, as shown in D/, 

To expenses of transportation and other incidental expenses, as labor and 
store rent, in preserving skins at diiferent places, and a due proportion 
of contingent expenses at the superintendent's office, 

Cr. 
By amount of stock on hand at the trading-house: 
Merchandise and implements. 
Cash, . . . - 

Peltries, - - - - 

Debts, .... 
Buildings, ... 



$995 14| 

117 46 

6,782 30 

3,471 06^ 

727 31? 



Deduct amount of debts due from the trading-house. 



$12,093 28i 
85 62A 



By amount of salaries of the factor and assistant, paid at the trading-house, 
and reimbursed at the Treasury, ... 



Balance, being estimated loss this year. 



$14,451 69i 



12,007 66 
1,224 65 



$14,642 69| 



13,232 31 



$1,410 38| 



F. 

General account of the United States Indian trade, exhibiting the profit and loss thereof , from March 31, 1811, 

to April 1, 1815. 



1811 
March 


31, 


March 


31, 


March 


31, 


1815 
April 




April 




April 





April 



United States trading-houses, Drs. 

To amount of property of various kinds on hand at the trading-houses, including 
merchandise, buildings, debts, cash, &c., as per statement marked Fa, 

To amount of furs, peltries, &c. in the stores of the superintendent, and in the 
hands of agents, tor sale, as per abstract ¥ b, - - _ - 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office previous to 
this date, but which had not then been received at the trading-houses, as per 
abstract Fc, - - -- 

To amount of merchandise forwarded from the superintendent's office since March 
31, 1811, and received previous to this date, as per abstract F rf, - 

To amount of subsistence of the factors and assistant factors, paid at the superin- 
tendent's office, from March 31, 1811, to this date, as per abstract F e. 

To amount of transportation and contingent accounts, paid at various places, in- 
cluding store rent, labor, and packages, for preserving skins, compensation to 
agents in transporting, selling, &c. , interpreters, office and warehouse rent, sta- 
tionary, fuel, &c., as per abstract ¥/, . - - . 

To balance, ....... 



To amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy during th« war, 



$156,083 47 
32,157 49 

10,768 83 
115,970 99 

8,226 75 



49,689 70 
55,797 48 



$428,694 71 



$43,369 61 



Hkii 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



F — Continued. 



April 
April 
April 
April 
April 
April 



United States trading-houses, Ces. 

By amount of property of various kinds on hand at the trading-houses at this date, 
including merchandise, buildings, cash, debts. &c.,as per statement marked ¥g. 

By amount received for furs, peltries, &c. sold from March 31, 1811. to this date, 
as per abstract FA, 

By amount received from the trading-houses in cash and drafts, fiom March 31, 
1811, to thiii date, as per abstract F I, . - - . 

By amount of furs, peltries. &c. remaining in the stores of the superintendent and 
in the hands of agents unsold, as per abstract F k, - 

By amount of salaries due from the Treasury Department, paid from the trading- 
houses, and reimbursed by the Treasury, as per abstract F /, - 

By amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy during the war, as per ab- 
stract F »«, ...... 



By balance gained in trade, . - . 

Deduct amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy. 



By final balance. 



$104,871 55 
135,358 59 
55,690 77 
65,402 32 
23,991 87 
43,369 61 



$428,694 71 



$55,797 48 
43,369 61 



$12,427 87 



Fa. 

Statement exhibiting the amoxmt of property on hand, of various descriptions, at each of the Indian factories on 

the 1st of April, 1811. 



Factories. 


Description of property. 


Amounts. 


Total. 


Fort Hawkins, 


Merchandise and implements, 


$4,845 10 






Cash, 


1,343 39 






Peltiy, 


6,935 87 i 






Buildings, cost of. 


470 28^ 






Debts due, ... 


.571 86i 


$14,166 514 






Chickasaw BluflFs, - - - 


Merchandise, - - - 


2,091 974 






Peltries, 


2,012 50 






Cash, 


7 Oli 






Contingent articles, 


36 00 






Buildings, 


100 00 






Debts due, - - - 


3,487 22i 


7,734 714 








Choctaw, ... 


Merchandise, - - _ 


9,102 60 






Peltry, &c. 


11,634 96i 






Cash, 


1,325 75 






Debts due, 


3,969 90 











26,033 21 


Osage, - - - . 


Merchandise, - - - 


21,331 87i 






Furs and peltries. 


2,822 26 






Buildings, ... 


3,180 00 






Debts due, - - - 


2,255 30 


29,589 43 






Des Moines, - - - 


Merchandise, - - . 


12,229 26| 






Furs, peltries, &c. 


5,017 31J 






Debts due, ... 


825 57 






Cash, 


19 87 






Buildings, - - - 


3,321 00 











21,413 02 


Natchitoches, - - - 


Merchandise, ■ - . 


6,395 00 






Furs and peltries. 


2,157 79 






Debts due, ... 


1,155 22 






Buildings, - - - 


2,239 97 










11,947 98 


Chicago, ... 


Merchandise, ... 


5,630 62 






Cash, 


330 71 






Furs and peltries, 


3,940 lOi 






Debts due, . . - 


838 30i 






Furniture, - - - 


134 31* 






Contingent articles. 


94 63 






Buildings, estimated at - 


500 00 


11,468 68 


Sandusky, ... 


.Merchandise, - - . 


1,479 10 




Buildings, . - - 


854 65 






Furs and peltries. 


1,499 814 






Cash, ... 


102 24 






Bills receivable, - 


116 37| 






Debts due, . - _ 


573 33 










4,625 51 


Mackinac, 


Merchandise, skins, &c. 


11,658 08 






Debts due. 


5,124 46 






Furniture, 


200 00 


16,982 54 


Fort Wayne, - - - 


Merchandise, peltries, &c. - 


8,797 93 




Cash,- . , - 


76 374 






Debts due, - 


2,747 56^ 






Buildings, - . _ 


500 00 


12,121 8> 








$156,083 47 



56 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



F b. 

Abstract of furs, peltries, Sfc. remaining unsold in the stores of the Superintendent and in the hands of agents on 

the 1st April, 1811. 





In the stores 


In the hands 


In the hands 




From what factory. 


of the superin- 


of J. Saul, 


of J. L. Dias, 


Whole am't. 




tendent. 


New Orleans. 


New York. 




Des Moines, .... 


$4,266 65 


. 




$4,266 65 


Osage, - . - . - 


4,257 10 


- 




4,257 10 


Chickasaw Bluffs, . . . - 


1,789 35 


- 


$6,175 54 


7,964 89 


Choctaw, - . . . - 


- 


- 


147 43 


147 43 


Natchitoches, .... 


- 


- 


9,607 59 


9,607 59 


Sandusky, ..---- 


1,749 84 


- 


- 


1,749 84 


Chicaeo, . . - - . 


- 


- 


94 07 


94 07 


Fort Wayne, .... 


1,660 36 


- 


153 56 


1,813 92 


Arkansas, ----- 




$2,256 00 




2,256 00 




$32,157 49 



F c. 

Abstract of merchandise forwarded to sundry factories from the office of Superintendent of Indian Trade which 
had not reached their places of destination, and not included in the factory inventories of March 31, 1811. 



To what factory. 


Amount forwarded, 
March 20, 1811. 


Amount forwarded, 
March 30, 1811. 


Total. 


Des Moines, . . . - 
Osage, - - - . - 
Chickasaw, - - - - - 
Choctaw, - . - - - 

Fort Wayne, .... 


$1,220 76 


$3,726 88 

229 87 

1,072 33 

2,495 06 

2,024 93 


$3,726 88 

229 87 

2,293 09 

2,495 06 

2,024 93 




$10,769 83 



F d. 

Abstract of merchandise forwarded from the office of the Superintendent of Indian Trade to the several trading- 
houses, from April 1, 1811, to March SI, 1815. 





Forwarded 


From April 1, 


From April 1, 


From April 1, 




To what trading-house. 


from April 1, 


1812, to March 


1813, to March 


1814, to March 


Total. 




1811, to AprU, 


31, 1813. 


31, 1814. 


31, 1815. 






1812. 










Chickasaw, . - - 


$4,314 73 


. 


$6,306 30 


$3,634 31 


$14,255 34 


Choctaw, - - - - 


780 29 


$4,598 08 


4,215 20 


8,246 94 


17,840 51 


Des Moines, ... 


2,720 06 


5,502 47 


6,218 75 


7,974 30 


22,415 58 


Osage, .... 


534 94 


4,486 44 


7,872 33 


8,041 87 


20,935 58 


Natchitoches, ... 


9,099 70 


4,973 50 


4,243 79 


6,163 98 


24,480 97 


Chicago, .... 


5,097 06 


- 


- 


. 


5,097 06 


Fort Hawkins, 


2,533 87 


. 


- 


- 


2,533 87 


Michiiimackinac, 


1,965 30 


. 


- 


- 


1,965 30 


Sandusky, - - - - 


3,541 86 




- 


- 


3,541 86 


Fort Wayne, ... 


- 


2,904 92 


- 


- 


2,904 92 


Total dollars, 


30,587 81 


22,465 41 


28,856 37 


34,061 40 


115,970 99 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



57 



F e. 

Abstract of subsistence money (in lieu of rations) paid to the agents and assistant agents of the United States 
Indian trading-houses from April 1, 1811, to March 31, 1815. 



Trading-houses. 


Names. 


Time. 


Amount. 


Fort Hawkins, 


Jonathan Halsted, agent. 


3 years 8 months 21 days, at 


$365 


$1,359 50 


Fort Hawkins, 


Charles Magnan, assistant, - 


4 years, at - 


- 150 


600 00 


Natchitociies, 


T. M. Linnard, agent. 


4 years, at - 


- 3G5 


1,460 00 


Chickasaw, 


J. B. Treat, agent. 


1 year, at - 


- 365 


365 00 


Chickasaw, 


R. P. Bayly, assistant. 


1 year 4 months 11 days, at 


- 150 


200 34 


Chickasaw, 


R. P. Bayly, agent. 


1 year 4 months 27 days, at 


- 365 


513 67 


Chickasaw, 


Isaac Rawlings, agent, 


1 year 20 days, at 


- 365 


385 00 


Choctaw, 


G. S. Gaines, agent. 


4 years, at - 


- 365 


1,460 00 


Choctaw, 


Ths. Malone, assistant, 


4 years, at - 


■ 150 


600 00 


Osage, 


G. C. Sibley, agent. 


4 years, at - 


- 365 


1,460 00 


Osage, 


Isaac Rawlings, assistant, 


2 years 1 1 months 1 1 days, at 


- 150 


441 27 


Des Moines, 


J. Johnston, agent, 


4 years, at - 


- 365 


1,460 00 


Des Moines, 


Asa Payne, assistant. 


1 year 2 months, at 


- 150 


175 00 


Des Moines, 


R. B. Belt, assistant, 


2 years 7 montlis 3 days, at 


- 150 


388 99 


Fort Wayne, 


J. Johnston, agent. 


1 year 6 months, at 


- 365 


547 50 


Fort Wayne, 


S. Johnston, assistant. 


1 year 9 months, at 


- 150 


262 50 


Chicago, 


M. Irwin, agent. 


1 year 9 months, at 


- 365 


638 75 


Sandusky, 


S. Tupper. agent. 


1 year 7 months 15 days, at 


- 270 


168 75 


Sandusky, 


J. B. Varnum, agent, 


1 year 1 month 15 days, at 


- 270 


303 75 


Sandusky, 


J. Chapin, clerk. 


3 months, at (per year) 


- 130 


32 50 


Michilimackinac, 


Jos. B. Varnum, agent, 


I year 9 months, at 


- 365 


638 75 




13,461 27 


Less amount drawn from the trading-houses in cash and merchandise by the agents and assistant agents, 




in part of the above. 


ntendent's office. 


- 




5,234 52 


Amount paid at the superi 


8,226 75 



F/. 

Abstract of transportation and contingent accounts paid at the office of the Superintendent of Indian Trade, and 
other places, including store rent, labor, and packages for preserving skins, compensation to agents in trans- 
porting, selling, Sfc, interpreters, office and warehouse rent, stationary , fuel, Spc. 





From 


From 


From 


From 


Total 


Trading-houses. 


April 1, 1811, 


April 1, 1812, 


April 1, 1813, 


April 1, 1814, 


amount. 


to March 31, 


to March 31, 


to March 31, 


to March 31, 






1812. 


1813. 


1814. 


1815. 




Chickasaw, - - - - 


$2,823 78 


$513 72 


$2,335 73 


$1,860 59 


$7,533 82 


Choctaw, .... 


1,981 21 


1,200 33 


2,073 24 


1,791 91 


7.046 69 


Des Moines, - - - . 


1,184 74 


2,280 53 


3,205 10 


1,666 12 


8,336 49 


Osage, .... 


423 26 


1,835 24 


4,238 58 


1,775 76 


8,272 84 


Natchitoches, ... 


4,649 39 


1,489 99 


2,779 35 


1,664 84 


10,583 57 


Chicago, .... 


1,760 44 


572 51 


. 


. 


2,332 95 


Fort Hawkins, ... 


800 48 


242 07 


179 26 


191 00 


1,412 81 


Mackinac, - 


810 91 


480 83 


. 


- 


1.291 74 


Sandusky, 


1,293 88 


292 91 


, 


. 


1,586 79 


Fort Wayne, ... 


595 27 


696 73 






1,292 00 
$49,689 70 



58 



INDIAN AFFAIRS, 



[No. 142. 



Statement exhibiting the amount of property of various hinds on hand at each of the United States Indian trading- 
houses, on the 1st of April, 1815. 



Factories. 


Description of property. 


Amounts. 


Total. 


F»rt Hawkins, 


Merchandise and implements. 


$995 14| 






Cash, 


117 46 






Peltry, 


6,782 30 






Debts due, . . - 


3,385 44 






Buildings, ... 


727 31 


812,007 65i 






Cliickasaw Bliifts, 


Merchandise, ... 


2,414 72^ 






Furs and peltries. 


205 19 






Debts due. 


3,356 81i 






Buildings, ... 


100 00 


6,076 78 






Choctaw. 


Merchandise, 


5,825 48 






Peltry, 


17,694 70 






Cash, ... 


4,676 72 






Bills receivable, ... 


273 10 






Debts, 


7,501 53 


35,971 53 






Osage, . . - 


Merchandise, ... 


9,869 75 






Debts. 


140 7U 






Buildings, ... 


2,543 60| 


12,554 07 


Des Moines, 


Merchandise, 


12.301 73 




Debts due, - - - 


4,686 47 


16,988 20 


Natchitoches, _ - - 


Merchandise, ... 


5,386 83 




Furs and peltries. 


8,265 25 






Buildings. ... 


2,239 97 






Furniture, ... 


200 00 






Cash. 


108 73i 






Bills of exchange. 


4.598 15| 






Debts, 


474 41 


21,273 35 








$104,871 54 



F h. 

Abstract of amounts received by the Superintendent of Indian Trade for furs, p^Jtries, S^'c., sold from Aprill, 1811, 

to March 31, 1815. 





From 


Fiom 


From From 


Total 


Trading-houses. 


April 1, 1811, 


April 1, 1812, 


April 1, 1813, April 1, 1814, 


amount. 


to March 31, 


to March 31, 


to March 31, 


to March 31, 






1812. 


1813. 


1814. 


1815. 




Des Moines, . - - - 


810,762 11 


$12,041 94 


$8,013 25 


$11,269 16 


$42,086 4G 


Osage. . . . - 


6,151 46 


5,052 39 


14.672 64 


10,712 21 


36,5g8 70 


Chickasaw, - . . - 


2,099 86 


5,499 77 


869 98 


7,187 43 


15,657 04 


Choctaw. - - 


147 43 


2,348 53 


1,826 85 


- 


4,322 81 


Natchitoches, ... 


203 57 


9,080 88 


323 64 


11,832 17 


21,439 76 


Sandusky, - - - 


1,895 27 


1,028 00 


- 


- 


2,923 27 


Chicago, .... 


85 06 


5,801 63 


- 


, 


5,886 69 


Fort Wayne, ... 


2,522 95 


1,882 66 


- 


- 


4,405 61 


Arkansas, - . . - 


- 


- 


- 


2,058 25 


2,058 25 


■ 


823,867 71 


42.735 30 


25,706 36 


43,059 22 


135,368 59 



Ft. 

Abstract of cash and drafts received by the Superintendent of Indian Trade, from the trading-houses, from 

April 1, 1811, to March 31, 1815. 





Receired from 


Receired from 


Received from 


Received from 


Total 


Trading-houses. 


April 1, 1811, 


April 1, 1812, 


April 1, 1813, 


April 1, 1814, 


amount. 


to March 31, 


to March 31, 


to March 31, 


to March 31, 






1812. 


1813. 


1814. 


1815. 




Chickasaw, . - - - 


$98 25 


. 


. 


$2,301 45 


$2,399 70 


Choctaw. .... 


. 


- 


- 


700 00 


700 00 


Des Moines, - - - - 


. 


$800 00 


$1,096 78 


1.500 00 


3,996 78 


Osage, .... 


3,480 00 


. 


3,480 00 


15,707 34 


22.667 34 


Natchitoches, ... 


500 75 


- 


1,628 50 


1,671 06 


3,800 31 


Chicago, 


945 35 


780 67 


- 


• 


1,726 02 


Michiliinackinac, ... 


8,905 76 


416 .•)(! 


. 


- 


9,382 06 


Sandusky, - . 


. 


235 00 


- 


. 


235 00 


Fort Wayne, ... 


1.488 82 


- 


8,860 62 


434 12 


10.783 56 




$15,478 93 


2,231 97 


15,665 90 


22,313 97 


55,690 77 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



59 



F k. 

Abstract of furs, peltries, ^'C. remaining in the stores of the superintendent, and in the hands of agents, for sale, 

on the Slst of March, 1815. 



In the stores of the superintendent. 

In the hands of Joseph Saul, a?ent. New Orleans, - 

In the handi of James Kennerly, agent, St. Louis, - 



814.41f) 46 

49.797 41 

1,188 45 



$65,40-2 3-3 



FZ. 
Abstract of cash and merchandise drawn by the factors from the trading-houses, on account of their salaries. 





From April 1, 


From April 1, 


From April 1, 


From April 1, 




Trading-houses. 


1811, to 
March 31, 


1812, to 
March 31, 


1813, to 
March 31, 


1814, to 
March 31, 


Total 
amount. 




1812. 


1813. 


1814. 


1815. 




Fort Hawkins, - . - 


®l,500 00 


$1,500 00 


SI, 500 00 


$1,224 65 


$5,724 65 


Chickasaw, ... 


1,000 00 


958 72 


140 72 


1,000 00 


3.099 44 


Choctaw, - . - - 


1,500 00 


1,500 00 


1,500 00 


1,500 00 


6.000 00 


Osage, ... - 


702 65 


995 23 


481 97 


682 50 


2,863 40 


Des Moines, ... 


331 00 


471 21 


230 37 


- 


1,032 58 


Natchitoches, ... 


515 00 


1,000 00 


1,000 00 


1,000 00 


3,515 00 


Fort Wayne, 


325 01 


120 00 


. 


- 


445 01 


Sandusky, ... 


174 51 


622 79 


- 


- 


797 30 


Chicago, - - . - 


- 


515 49 


- 


- 


515 49 




$6,048 17 


$7,683 49 


$4,853 06 


$5,407 15 


$23,991 87 



F m, 

Estimate of losses sustained by the Indian factory department during the late war by destruction of buildings, ^-c. 

by the enemy, viz: 



1812. 



1812. 
July 17, 

July 17, 

July 17, 

July 17, 



1812. 
October 31, 



October 31, 
October 31, 



1813. 



Late factory at Chicago. 
Amount merchandise on hand at this factory on its evacuation, which was 

delivered to the Indians by the commanding oflicer. Captain Heald, - 
Amount furs and peltries shipped to Mackinac, and there taken by the 

British, - - - ■ . . ". 

Amount soldiers' due bills on hand, most of whom, it is believed, were 

murdered by the Indians, . . . . 

Amount debts due from officers and soldiers of the fort. 
Amount debts due from Indians, - - . . 

Amount household furniture left in the factory, - - - 

Amount factory buildings, estimated, - . . 

Late factory at Ulichilimac/tinac. 

Amount of goods, household furniture, &c. delivered the British at the 
capitulation of Fort Mackinac, as per British officer's receipt. 

Amount debts due the factory, which were collected by the British after 
the capitulation, as per the British officer's receipt. 

Amount cash delivered the enemy by Lieutenant Hanks at the capitula- 
tion of Fort Mackinac, . . . . 

Amount cash taken from Joseph B. Varnum, factor at Brownstown, by 
the British and Indians belonging to this factory, 

Late factory nl Sandusky. 
Amount property taken by the British and Indians at this factory, as per 

Jacob B. Varnum, the factor's, statement of this date. 
Amount factory buildings burnt by the enemy, - - - 

Amount furs and peltries taken by the Biitish at the surrender of Detroit, 

belonging to this factory, .... 

Late factory at Fort Jfayne. 
Anwunt furs, peltries, &c. lost when the Indians burnt the factory build- 
ings, estimated at - - - - - 
Amount hardware, &c. lost at same time, estimated at 
Amount peltries taken at the surrender of Detroit belonging to this factory. 
60 packs, estimated at - . - . 
(See factor's letters 1st October and 13th December, 1812.) 
AmouiU factory buildings, estimated at - - - 

Lale factory at Fort Madison. 
Sixty packs peltries lost by burning the factory buildings, estimated at $30 
per pack, ------ 

One hundred and twenty bear skins burnt in factory buildings, estimated, 

Other articles lost in the buildings, estimated, . - - 

Amount buildings burnt, cost, . - . . 

(See factor's letter 15Ui September, 1912.) 



$6,120 031 

5,781 91 

33 01 

385 27 

134 31 

119 94 

500 00 



9,810 87 

2,746 44 

300 00 

104 00 



3,821 72 
814 65 



3,000 00 
500 00 

1,500 00 

500 00 



1,800 00 
129 00 
250 00 

3,321 00 



813,074 47 



12,961 31 



6.333 83 



5,500 00 
$43,369 61 



60 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



G. 



Chickasaw trading-house. 



1813, April 1, 

1814, April 1, 



1812, April 1, 
1815, April 1, 



Dr. 

To amount lost on trade from 31st March, 1812, to this date, as per statement C a. 
To amount lost on trade from 31st March, 1813, to this date, as per statement D a. 



Cr. 



CR. 

By amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1811, to this date, per state- 
ment B a, - - - - . $3,606 51 

By amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1814, to this date, per state- 
ment E a, •• - - - . 12,432 93 

Balance, gained in four years' trade. 



$4,866 13 
931 73 



5,797 86 



16,039 44 



$10,241 58 



H. 

Choctaw ttading-house . 



1812, April 1, 
1814, April 1, 



1813, April 1, 
1815, April 1, 



Dr. 

To amount lost on trade from 31st March, 1811, to this date, as per statement B b. 
To amount lost on trade from 31st March, 1813, to this date, as per statement D b, 

Cr. 

By amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1812, to this date, per state- 
ment C 6, . - . . . $155 10 

By amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1814, to this date, per state- 
ment E 5, - - - - - 5,196 25 



Balance, lost in four years' trade, 



$3,346 38 
2,087 42| 



5,433 SO.i 



5,351 35 



$82 45j 



I. 

Des Moines trading-house. 



1813, April 1, 
1815, April 1, 



1812, April 1, 
1814, April 1, 



Dr. 

To amount lost on trade from 31st March, 1812, to this date, as per statement C e. 
To amount lost on trade from 31st March, 1814, to this date, as per statement E c, 

Cr. 

By amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1811, to this date, as per 

statement Be,- - - - - $4,285 75 

By amount gained on trade from 3lst March, 1813, to this date, as per 

statement D c, - - - - - 9,701 00 



Balance, gained in four years' trade, 



1,170 71 
76 16 



1,246 87 



13,986 75 
$12,739 88 



K. 

Osage trading-house. 



1812, April 1, 

1813, April 1, 

1814, April 1, 

1815, April 1, 



Amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1811, to this date, as per statement B rf. 
Amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1812, to this date, as per statement C d. 
Amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1813, to this date, as per statement D d. 
Amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1814, to this date, as per statement E d. 

Amount gained on four years' trade. 



$1,929 89 

3,369 96 

252 21 

8,730 84 


$14,282 99 



L. 

Natchitoches trading-house. 



1812. 
April 1, 



1813. 
April 1, 

1814. 
April 1, 

1815. 
April 1, 



Dr. 

To amount lost on trade from 31st March, 1811, to this date, (as per state- 
ment Be,) 

Cr. 
By amount gained on trade from SlstMarch, 1812, to this date, (per state- 
ment C e,) <- - - - 

By amount gained on trade from 31st March, 1813, to this date, (per state- 
ment D e,) 

By amount gained on trade from SlstMarch, 1814, to this date, (per state- 
ment E e,) 



Balance gained on trade in four years, - 



$4,638 20 
1,587 90 
9,411 45 



$3,634 18 



15,637 55 



$12,003 37 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



61 



M. 
Chicago trading-house. 



1813. 
Dec. 31, 
Dec. 31, 

1813, 
April 1, 



Dr. 

To amount lost in trade from 31st March, 1812, to this date, as per statement C/, 
To amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy, as shown in statement F m, 

Cr. 
By amount gained in trade from 31st March, 1811, to this date, per statement B/, 

Balance lost from March 31, 1811, to December 31, 1813, 



$202 78 
M3,074 47 



13,277 25 
1,773 94 



$11,503 31 



N. 
Michilimackinac trading-house. 



1812. 
December 
December 


31, 
31, 

31, 


Dr. 

To amount lost in trade from March 31, 1813, to this date, as per statement C g. 
To amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy, as per statement F m, ■ 

Cr. 

By amount gained in trade from March 31, 1811, to this date, as per statement Bg, 

Balance, loss from March 31, 1811, to December 31, 1812, 


$528 28 
12,961 31 


1813. 
March 


13,489 59 
2,003 32 




$11,486 27 



Sandusky trading-house. 



1812. 
April 
December 


1, 

31, 

31, 


Dr. 

To amount lost in trade from March 31 to this date, as per statement B h. 
To amount of loss sustained by destruction of the trading-house by the enemy, as 
per statement F m, - 

Cr. 

By amount gained in trade from April 1, 1812, to this date, as per statement C h, 

Balance lost from March 31, 1811, to December 31, 1812, 


$1,793 13 
6,333 83 


1812. 
December 


8,136 96 
73 52 




$8,053 44 



Fort Hawkins trading-house. 



April 

1 

April 



April 



April 



Dr. 

To amount lost in trade from March 31, 1811, to this date, as per statement B i, - 

To amount lost in trade from March 31, 1814, to this date, as per statement E/, - 

Cr. 

By amount gained in trade from March 31, 1812, to this date, per state- 
ment C 2, - - - - - - $428 62 

By amount gained in trade from March 31, 1813, to this date, per state- 
ment D /, - - - - - 643 63 



Balance lost in four years' trade. 



$42 75 
1,410 38 



1,453 13 



1,072 25 



$380 88 



Fort Wayne trading-house. 



1814. 
April 1, 

1814. 
April 1, 



Dr. 

To amount of property taken or destroyed by the enemy, as per statement F m, 

Cr. 

By amount gained in trade from April 1, 1811, to this date, per statement D g. 

Balance lost from March 31, 1811, to this date, 



$5,500 00 
166 54 



$5,333 46 



62 I N D I A N A F F A I R S. [No. 142. 

R. 

Sat: Kaskaskia, Illi.vois Teruitorv, November — , 1815. 

Soma time in Scplombor last I had the iioiior to receive your letter of August 17lh, with tlie resolution of 
the Senate of the IJniied States to which it referred; but, owing to my absence from home, my engagements as a 
commissioner to treat with the Indians, and an attack of bilious fever, ic has never been in my power till now 
to communicaie the information which you requested. 

Of the annuities stipulated to be paid to the different iribes of Indians within this Territory, none has over 
been sent to me, except those of the Kaskaskia tribe, which were paid within the period mentioned in the resolu- 
tion of the Senate of t!ie United States, according to a statement hereto annexed, marked No. 1. 

The whole .imount of goods which 1 gave as presents to all the Indians within niy agency, during the four 
years preceding the 4th of March last, is §432 OSJ. 

The Government not having furnished me with one single article, I was obliged to buy those goods at the 
extravagant retail prices of this country, which were nearly double what they otherwise would have cost the Gov- 
ernment. The most of them were given at the great council which was iield at Cahokia in April, 1812, with the 
Pattawalaniies, Ottawas, Kickapoos, and Chippewas. The residue were given, on occasions that seemed absolutely 
to require it, to Indians belonging to the different tribes within this Territory, and to prisoners that were taken at 
the head of Peoria lake in the expedition of 1812. A list exhibiting the whole amount, and the dates at which the 
respective proportions thereof were given, is herewith transmitted, marked No. 2. 

In submitting to you, agreeably to your request, the following observations upon the several questions presented 
in the last paragraph of the resolution of the Senate, I must premise that, as I do not profess to have a competent 
knowledge of tlie Indians in other parts of America to decide upon the course which it would be proper to adopt 
in relation to them, my remarks are intended to apply exclusively to this section of the Union, and to the Indians 
residing upon the Mississippi river and its waters, above this place. 

The first question is, " whether any alteration of the powers and duties of the several ofScers and agents 
employed in the superintendence and management of Indian aflairs would be advantageous?" 

That inconveniences and evils have grown out of the management and arrangements that have hitherto pre- 
vailed, experience has fully testified. But whether all these have resulted from defects in the existing laws, or from 
an erroneous construction of them, I shall not stop to inquire. 

As superintendent of Indian affairs, ex officio, by virtue of my office as Governor, it would seem that my duties 
and powers extended to all the Indians within the limits of this Territory; and yet a co-ordinate power in some 
cases, and Jin exclusive one in others, have been exercised by the Governor of Missouri Territory. 

Mr. Boilvin, the agent at Prairie du Chien, resides within this Territory, and, as I understand, all his accounts 
have to bn submitted to the inspection and scrutiny of Governor Clark only. 

The principal resid(Mice of the Sacs is, and long has been, on Rock river; but with them nothing seems to 
have been left for mo to do, either before or since the commencement of the late war; and without consulting me, 
and contrary to my most deliberate opinions, (which, as well as I now recollect, I had the honor of submitting to 
one of your predecessors,) that part of them which professed to be friendly to our Government were removed to 
the Osage river, in the Missouri Territory, whither also the agent (Mr. Blondeau) was called, and from whence he 
makes no report to me on any occasion; whereas, if he were now subject to my control, (as I think he ought to be,) 
my judgment greatly deceives me if I could not have him much more usefully employed. 

Mr. Forsyth was also appointed a subagent at Peoria, with instructions to report to, and receive the orders of. 
Governor Clark. 

Under ;ill these circumstances, the exercise of co-ordinate powers by the latter gentleman and myself, accord- 
ing to the dictates of our respective judgments, rendered us liable to counteract each other in cases in which our 
views and opinions were different, and in other cases unnecessarily to multiply the expenses of the Government, by 
both of us pursuing the same object, when the measures adopted by one might have been sufficient; and although 
the mutual friendship and good understanding that have constantly existed between us have prevented any very 
unpleasant collisions, yet it can hardly be supposed that we have always thought exactly alike upon all subjects that 
were connected with our respective duties. It is therefore my opinion that each superintendent of Indian affairs, 
\ifithin his respective Territory, should in all cases be the res|)onsible head of the Indian department therein; 
that all other agents should be subordinate to him; and that their accounts should undergo his examination and 
receive his sanction. 

The delivery of annuities to the Indians of one Territory by the Governor of another is calculated to produce 
a confliclion of authority; has a tendency to lessen the influence of the superintendent within whose jurisdiction 
tliey reside, and, by putting it out of his power to retain any part of those annuities, even in those cases in which 
the law would justify it, diminishes the responsibility which they [he] would otherwise feel, and destroys the check 
which it is essential he should hold over them to restrain them from the commission of acts of injustice, or to coerce 
retribution after such acts shall have been perpetrated. 

The Sacs, for example, have been in the habit of receiving their annuities from the Governor of the Missouri 
Territory. Ho, however, has no cognizance of any offences committed by them. Every demand for satisfaction 
must be made by me, as the Governor or superintendent within whose jurisdiction they reside. He therefore ought 
not necessarily to be presumed to know that v.hich it is my province exclusively to inquire into. And, indeed, 
with the best disposition to harmonize and co-operate, cases might happen in which it would be impossible for me 
to communicate in time the most important information; for the want of which, the annuities might be delivered, 
when, according to the spirit and intention of the law, they ought to be retained. 

In other cases we might disagree as to the propriety of delivering them: of course, I could have no control; for 
he, having the power in his own hands, could execute it at pleasure. 

It might even sometimes be useful to excite the fears of those people, in order to make a merit of forgiving 
them,}in cases in which it would not be absolutely necessary, and might be impolitic, to punish them; but, in losing 
all control over the annuities, I lose the most efficient engine with which to manage them, whilst the whole burden 
of that duty rests upon me exclusively. Besides, nothing is more injurious in the management of Indians than for 
them to have a father for this, and another for that purpose. Such a system is too complex for their comprehen- 
sion. The management of them, to be successful, ought to be simple and perfectly uniform; and therefore I think 
that all annuities, wheresoever payable, ought to be delivered to them by the Governor in whose Territory they 
reside, or by some person known to be specially authorized by him. 

The powers and duties of the superintendents of Indian affairs, and all other subordinate agents, appear to be 
too limited for any real utility, or are very imperfectly defined by any statute law that I have seen; and if there 
be any common law upon the subject, it is extremely difficult to ascertain what it is. 



1816.] TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 63 

In the law "to regulate trade and intercourse with tlie Indians, and to preserve peace on the frontiers," tlip only 
powers granted to the superintendents are: 1st. To f;rant licenses to traders'; in which lie lias no oilier disrreiicm 
tlian to judge of the sufficiency of tlie security reriuired. 2d. To revoke siicli licenses "tor a traiis^ntssion of tiie 
reirulalioiis and restrictions provided for the governnKtnt of trade and intercourse, with the Indian tribes." 3d. To 
bring suit upon such bonds as he may have taken, for the breach of any condition therein contained. 4th. To f rant 
licenses to purchase horses in the Indian country. And, 5th. Under the direction or instructions of llie President 
of the United States, to demand satisfaction for wrongs done by the Indians. 

It is not made his particular duty, nor has he the power, to enforce any other regulations contained in the alinvt- 
retited law. Persons found in the Indian country hunting, trespassing, tradint; without license, or engaged in <iny 
other unlawful purpose, may be apprehended by the military force of the United States, and delivered to the civil 
authority. But where there is no military force at hand, or where those persons are out of the reach of it, the 
superintendent has no power whatever to provide for their apprehension and removal, unless by application to the 
civil authority for ordinary process, which iti many instances he could not procure, in conseciuenct^ of being unable 
to give the names or designate the persons of the offenders; and, if he could procure ii, lew officers could he found 
that would execute it, or would be willing to do so for the usual compensation. lu consequence of which, many 
such oftenders pass with impunity, while those unlawful visits and intrusions have the most uuliap[iy efii'ct upon 
the Indians, who have repeatedly made tlieni the subject of their bitterest complaints. Nothing less will do, to 
effectuate the intention of the law in this particular, but a competent power of removing such persons, and a rigid 
execution of it. 

The difficulty of obtaining legal proof to convict, and the many chances of acquittal, are so great that few 
persons are deterred from those unlawful enterprises by the fear of punishment; which, when inflicted, is effected 
by such tardy means as never to conciliate the Indians. 

Even at this very time I have the most unquestionable information that there are a considerable number of while 
persons hunting on the Illinois river, within the Indian boundary, and I have reason to believe that they are prin- 
cipally from Portage des Sioux, in Missouri Territory, though I cannot at present ascertain the name of a single one 
of them. Under thes« circumstances, being fully impressed with the impolicy as well as injustice of permitting such 
conduct, I cannot avoid expressing the sincerest regret at being unable to take effectual measures for the removal 
of those people, and their delivery to the civil authority. There are, however, those who believe that the combined 
powers of Governor and superintendent would authorize me to remove them by force; but, as I have no instructions 
whatever from the President to warrant it, I should be as unwilling to place my defence on that ground in an actioa 
of false imprisonment as if those offices were perfectly separate and distinct. 

The law with regard to granting licenses I also think is very defective. Any person who tenders a bond with 
sufficient security conditioned for the faithful observance of such regulations and restrictions as are or shall be made 
for the government of trade and intercourse with the Indian tribes, is entitled to demand a license as a matter of 
right. The regulations and restrictions at present prescribed amount to little more, if any thing, than a prohibition 
to purchase certain articles of the Indians; and, while the most detestable and unprincipled wretches are at no loss 
to obtain the requisite security, they may practise conduct the most offensive to the Indians, immoral towards other 
traders, and injurious to the general interest of the Government, without any breach of their bonds, or without sub- 
jecting themselves to the revocation of their licenses, or to the legal refusal of new ones. 

The superintendent has no power to impose additional restrictions, and therefore could not, without special in- 
structions from the President, (which I have never received,) prohibit even temporarily the sale of ardent spirits, 
though such a prohibition might be imperiously required by every dictate of a rational precaution, as is now the case 
on the Illinois river, where the public surveyors are engaged in surveying the lands purchased by our Government 
of the Sacs, but whicii are occupied and claimed by the Pattawatamies, who have manifested no disposition to relin- 
quish their claim. 

As to the Indian agents, the law is perfectly silent with regard to their powers and duties, or those of the super- 
intendents in relation to them; and really I have been much at a loss to know what orders I could legally give to 
those who have been directed to report to me, and receive my orders; and, in general, I have been governed more 
by what I conceived would conciliate the Indians, promote their happiness, and advance the interest of the Gov- 
ernment, than by any rule expressly or constructively prescribed by law. 

Upon this view of the subject, I think the superintendent of Indian affairs within each Territory, and the agents 
under his direction within their respective agencies, should be specially required to superintend the faithful execution 
of the law " to regulate trade and intercourse with the Indians, and to preserve peace on the frontiers;" that they 
should be empowered to apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, all persons who shall have violated its provisions, 
or be found in the Indian country without license or passport; that they should deliver, or cause to be delivered, 
within convenient time, all such offenders to the civil authority; and that they should be authorized to incur any 
expenses necessary to the due execution of those powers and duties. 

It is also my opinion that the discretion of the superintendent in granting licenses ought to be enlarged, and that 
traders ought to be required to conduct themselves peaceably and correctly towards the Indians, respectfully and 
dutifully towards the Government, and to abstain from the common and injurious practice of endeavoring to excite 
the prejudices and hostility of the Indians towards other traders; for all which, effectual provisions ought to be made 
by law. 

On the second question presented in the resolution aforesaid, I do not possess the information requisite for forming 
a correct opinion, nor do I suppose any observations upon the subject of it were expected from me. 

The third and last question is, "whether a plan may not be devised that will be equally advantageous to the 
Indian tribes, and more economical to the public, whereby the Indian trade may, under safeguards, be hereafter 
carried on by individuals or private companies, instead of the manner in which the same is now conducted?" 

Admitting the present plan to be well calculated both to put down British traders and to conciliate the Indians, 
it is evident that no important consequences can be expected to flow from it without carrying it extensively into 
operation; for the former object cannot be accomplished without active competition in the same market; the latter 
can only be beneficially secured by providing the same accommodation for all the different tribes that have equal 
claims; as, otherwise, the jealousy that would be excited, and the hostility which would consequently be engendered, 
would render the plan totally abortive: for we certainly should gain nothing, if, in making one tribe our friends by 
our favors, we should make another, equally powerful and respectable, our enemies by our partiality or neglect; and 
I can venture to say that there are no people upon earth more jealous, or upon whom such a distinction would operate 
more injuriously, especially with the aid of British traders, in giving to it its highest possible effect. 

Goods to a great amount must, therefore, be transported to the numerous trading-houses which, upon this plan, 
ought to be established at many different and distant points. And, besides the danger of usual casualties, the risk 
in trusting to the fidelity of a multitude of agents, at all times considerable, is peculiarly so in this business. 



64 INDIANAFFAIRS. [No. 142. 

It can hardly be expected that married men of respectability would abandon their families, and desert all the 
comforls of civilized life, to engage in this kind of service. Single men must, therefore, be calculated on for such 
agencies. These, as all experience has proved, are liable to form connexions with, and to have children by, 
the Indian women, which, by giving birth to new attachments, produces a relish for savage life, at the same time 
that it destroys the inducements and interposes obstacles to a return to civil society; and instances of such effects 
bavins: been produced are so common and well known, that they ought to silence all question as to the proba- 
bility of iheir happening. Whenever, then, a man lias (uade up his mind to exchange the ordinary pursuits of 
civil life for savage independence, he must necessarily become indifferent to the opinions of that society which he 
has concluded to desert, regardless of its claims upon him, and would most probably cease to feel the influence of 
those motives which constitute the most efficient safeguards of honor and integrity. 

But independent of these considerations, if the risk of confiding in those agents is to be estimated in proportion 
to the temptation that is offered them, then certainly none can be greater which depends on the fidelity of man; 
for placed, as they must be, far in the interior of the Indian country, out of the reach of observation, and approx- 
imating British establishments in proportion to their distance from our settlements, nothing is more easy for them 
than to practise the greatest frauds without detection, or even to escape with the whole capital committed to their 
charge. A ver)' few cases of this kind would make the trade a losing business to the Government, or require such 
an advance upon its goods as to take from it all advantages over individuals. But supposing that all those aeents 
shoLjd make such remittances in furs and peltries as to prevent any loss on the part of the Government: what check 
is there to restrain them from defeating its benevolent intentions, by practising the greatest frauds upon the Indians, 
in selling the goods to them at the most exorbitant prices? All they have to do is,' to keep two sets of entries; or 
to charge themselves with such quantities of goods as they can vend, and make returns for the amount so charged. 

Should they all, however, act with perfect fairness and honesty, the trading-houses are notwithstanding liable to 
be used partially, if not extensively, as means of accommpdation to British traders themselves. For example, I 
will suppose that Mr. Johnson (one of the agents already appointed) shall be fortunate enough to arrive with his 
goods at Prairie du Chien next spring, just about the time that the British traders are ready to return to that place 
with their furs and peltries from tiie river St. Peter's: he, of course, would sell much lower than they could afibrd to 
do, otherwise it would be useless for him to go there; they therefore might find it to their advantage to obtain their 
supplies from him, which they could do with facility, by em|)loying some of the many Indians who always 
accompany them at that season of the year to trade for them; and 1 know not how it would be possible for him 
to detect all the schemes that might be adopted for that purpose. Such attempts, I am credibly informed, have 
been frequently known to succeed at Chicago, and doubtless have been practised with equal success at other public 
trading-houses. 

Upon this view of the subject, it is worthy of consideration whether sufficient encouragement to a more exten- 
sive operation of the present plan can be derived from the experiment that has already been made upon it. Limited 
as that may have been, it ought to be considered as a sufficient test of the efficacy of the plan in those places in 
which it has had full effect, and upon those Indians at least who have enjoyed the full benefit of it. 

For my part, I have never been able to discover, and I defy any man to specify, a solitary public advantage 
that has resulted from it in this country; while the melancholy fate of Chicago, the attacks upon Fort Madison, other 
early hostilities in its vicinity, the signal escape of the agents with the public goods from the Missouri, and the 
undeniable fact that, during the most successful operation of the public trading-houses at the above-mentioned 
places, individuals constantly vended more goods to the Indians for whose benefit those houses were established 
than the public agents did — all combine to afford practical demonstration that the system under consideration 
is neither calculated to conciliate and accommodate the Indians, nor for successful competition with British 
traders. 

An attentive consideration of the situation of the Indians, a knowledge of their customs and habits, and of the 
manner in which trade with ihem has been conducted from time immemorial, it seems to me are all that can be 
necessary to produce irresistible conviction that the present plan can never succeed to any great extent in this 
country against competition, and it surely is not an object to pursue it where there is none. 

The Indians having been long accustomed to obtain their supplies of goods on credit, about the usual time of 
their ijoing to their wintering grounds, which are very remote from iheir villages, and at which they have constantly 
been in the habit of disposing of every thing of any consequence that they have had to sell, cannot, from their 
improvident character, be presumed to be prepared at those times to make prompt payment, without which the 
public factors could not safi^ly sell to them; and therefore the cheapness of the goods is no advantage to them, 
because they are unable to avail themselves of il; while the traders who uniformly follow them to their hunting 
grounds are always anxious to advance their goods to them oh credit previous to their departure from their villages, 
and are prepared to furnish them with additional supplies afterwards. 

Even after they may have arrived at their hunting grounds, and acquired the means of purchasing goods, their 
object being more to supply present wants than to accumulate riches, it can hardly be supposed that, with their 
characteristic indolence, tlie prospect of getting goods a little cheaper would be a sufficient inducement with them 
to pack their furs and peltries a great distance to the factories, when they could otherwise obtain the supplies they 
wanted. But, besides the loss of time (then so peculiarly important to them) which would be attendant on occasional 
journeys of that kind during the hunting season, there are many other insuperable objections that forbid them; and 
at the expiration of tiieir hunt the}' have generally little, if any thing, left to dispose of. Admitting these facts to be 
true, (and 1 think I can very safely Vouch for their correctness,) how is it possible for a factory stationary at a par- 
ticular spot, and selling no goods upon credit, to compete^successfiilly with the individual enterprise which has always 
distinguished the British traders'? 

But supposing the present plan could be entirely successful in putting down British traders, our own, being 
much less formidable, of course would also fall victims to it; and hence would result a complete monopoly of the 
fur trade on the part of the Government, which would tend equally to excite the odium of the citizens of this country, 
and to check their further enterprises in exploring the hidden resources of wealth that remain yet to be discovered; 
whereby any increase in the trade would be prevented, because Government would hardly establish factories at 
any places except those at which experience had proved they could be advantageously employed; individuals 
would be deterred from making new establishments, lest, if their experiment succeeded, they might again be super- 
seded by the Government; and thus would be lost to the nation advantages of immense importance, if any calcu- 
lations can be made upon them from the enterprise of six men only, in the course of last year, Mfho then made dis- 
coveries equal to any that ever were made in the prosecution of the fur trade, within the space of twelve months, 
since the first settlement of America. 

The operation of the monopoly that would thus be effected, as I understand the plan of thf; Government, is not 
to make any profit by it; so that, while those citizens who have hitherto depended upon the fur trade for the support 
of their families would be entirely thrown out of the only business which they understand; they could not even 



1816.] TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. G5 



console themselves with the prospect of participating with the nation at large in (he profits of which that trade is 
susceptible; these would be entirely sacrificed by the Government for the purpose of preserving peace with the 
Indians; and as 1 think that less than the amount of those profits, for a single year, otherwise employed, would be 
abundantly more efficacious, whenever occasion might require it, it appe&rs to me to be a useless waste of the 
resources of the nation to make such an immense sacrifice for a number of years in succession, without any occur- 
rence in the mean time indicating even an apparent necessitj' for it; and when, too, the prospects of a rupture must 
be daily diminishing by the rapid increase of population on our frontiers, and by the fears with which it will neces- 
sarily inspire the Indians. 

It is believed, however, that as the principal object in establishing the present plan was to drive British traders, 
by fair competition, out of our limits, and thereby to get rid of their troublesome machinations with the Indians, 
Government would no longer prosecute it after those objects should be accomplished. But suppose it already to 
have succeeded fully to that extent, it nevertheless would not have annihilated British capital, or the Northwest 
Company, or that of Hudson's Bay. What then is to prevent the British traders from returning among us after the 
factories shall be withdrawn? Certainly nothing that I can conceive of. To succeed to the extent I have sup- 
posed would necessarily require the lapse of some years. In the mean time, our traders, from necessity, would have 
sought other employments, while our engages and voyageurs, (as the hirelings of Indian traders are called,) who 
are so accustomed and devoted to the Indian trade as to be, like sailors, fit for little else, would most probably, 
from the want of employment, have gone over to the British, and entered into their service; and, consequently, our 
own citizens would then be even less qualified than they are at present to enter into successful competition with 
our rivals. 

Having satisfied myself, at least, that the Government must encounter serious and important risks in the prose- 
cution of the present plan of conducting the Indian trade; that it never can succeed in accomplishing the objects 
for which it was established, or produce any other advantages equivalent to those risks; and that, if it could succeed 
to the full extent of the wishes and anticipations of its most sanguine supporters, it would be attended with 
sacrifices whicii are forbidden by the public interest, it is, consequently, my opinion that it would be good policy to 
abandon it, even if no substitute should be provided in its place. 

If, however, the Government is disposed to continue its own immediate agency in the Indian trade, its first care 
should be to obtain goods, particularly the important articles of blankets and cloths, of equal quality to those that are 
carried into the Indian market by our rivals, which never has been heretofore done in a single instance. For this 
purpose, it might be advisable to establish a manufactory of those articles, to be placed under the special direction 
and management of the superintendent of Indian trade. But if this is impracticable, and suitable importations 
cannot be made from England, I should suppose it would not be difficult to obtain samples of the English goods, 
and have such articles as we require sufficiently well manufactured in France. 

I would also recommend the establishment of a factory at St. Louis, whither all tiie goods intended for the 
Indians of the Mississippi river and its waters should be sent; for the management of which factory, a deputy 
superintendent of Indian trade should be appointed, with power to dispose of the goods to such traders as could 
give good security for the punctual payment of the price agreed upon, and also for their compliance with such 
regulations and restrictions as might be prescribed to them. 

By this means the danger of trusting to the fidelity of a great number of subordinate agents would be avoided; 
the goods, when sent into the Indian country, would not be at the risk of the Government; and as the sales to the 
Indians, on this plan, would be much more rapid, the price of the goods could of course be the sooner refunded. 

Those traders would be obliged to employ a great number of engages, who as well as themselves would be 
interested in conducting the trade and intercourse with the Indians in such a manner as to conciliate their friend- 
ship, and therefore might be relied upon as the most efficient and faithful agents of the Government, especially 
under their dependance upon it for further credits. 

At the same time numbers of the Canadian engag6s and voyageurs, invited by the prospects of employment which 
the operation of this plan would afford, would readily engage in our service, which, for many obvious reasons, ihey 
decidedly prefer to that of the British. This, by increasing our means of conducting the trade, while it would lessen 
those of our opponents, would do them the most essential injury; for nothing enables them to prosecute the fur 
trade with success so much as the great number of their engages and voyageurs, the low price at which they are 
hired, and the easy manner in which they are usually paid. As an example of which, it is within my own personal 
knowledge that the whole expense of transporting eight thousand weight of goods from Montreal to the Mississippi, 
wintering with the Indians, and returning with a load of furs and peltries in the succeeding season, including the 
cost of provisions and portages, and the hire of five engages for the whole time, does not exceed five hundred and 
twenty-five dollars, much of which is usually paid to those engages when in the Indian country, in goods, at an 
exorbitant price. 

If, therefore, the plan which I have the honor to suggest be calculated only to weaken our opponents in those 
essential resources, its absolute certainty of producing that effect, and pretty extensively too, would be sufficient to 
recommend its adoption. 

Whatever plan our Government may adopt, it is, I think, but reasonable to suppose that the British Government 
will endeavor to counteract it; therefore, as a further illustration of this subject, I will suppose our present plan 
adhered to, and the one I now recommend adopted by the British Government, and put into execution at the island 
of St. Joseph's. 

On this supposition, Mr. Johnson (our factor) arrives at Prairie du Chien next autumn with his $10,000 worth 
of goods; Mr. Dickson, having obtained an equal quantity at St. Joseph's, reaches the Indian villages about the 
same time. Both of these gentlemen are bound to refund to their respective Governments the cost of the eoods, 
including the expense of transportation. The Indians to whom the}' must vend them are, the Menomonies, Winne- 
bagoes. Sacs, Foxes, Chippewas, and Sioux, (the very Indians intended to be supplied by our factor.) The former 
remains stationary at Prairie du Chien, selling only to those Indians who go there prepared to make prompt payment; 
the latter pursues the usual course of the trade, and sends his engages to winter with the Indians on their hunting 
grounds. Can any man in this world, at all acquainted with the geography of the country, the situation and habits 
of the Indians, and the history of the fur trade, hesitate to believe that, under such circumstances, the latter gentle- 
man would be able to sell the most goods, to obtain the best price, and to make the earliest payment to his Gov- 
ernment? 

The only advantage which the British really enjoy over us, consisting in the number of their engag6s, would 
be daily diminishing, not only by the operation of the plan I recommend, in withdrawing those people from their 
service, but in its tendency to create new engages and voyageurs out of our own citizens; while our superior facilities 
of transportation hy large navigable rivers would eventually give us success throughout the whole extent of our 
limits at least. 



66 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 142. 

If Government should determine upon declining all further direct agency in the Indian trade, I would, in that 
case, recommend the legal incorporation of a company at St. Louis, with power to raise a competent capital for 
that purpose; and, among the conditions of incorporation, it should be provided that the company should buy, at a 
reasonable price, all the Indian goods which the Government might then have on hand, and should keep up trading- 
houses at those places at which we are bound by treaty to continue them. 

It might also be useful to invest the company with the privilege of employing a part of its capital in banking; 
but, not knowing whether the principle of either of those plans will be approved, I forbear any remarks upon minuter 
details. 

If neither of them should be thought advisable, and Government is disposed to foster the trade in the hands of 
individuals, this, I should suppose, might be done by allowing a drawback of all duties upon goods exported to the 
Indian country, which could be effected, without danger of fraud or evasion, by checks that might be interposed through 
the instrumentality of the present public agents: for example, I will suppose that a trader wishes to export his goods 
to the villages of the Sioux and Chippewas above Prairie du Chien; he might be required to enter his goods bj' 
invoice of articles, instead of packages, with the superintendent at St. Louis, and again to have both goods and 
invoice re-examined by Mr. Boilvin, our agent at Prairie du Chien: by this means, it would be seen whether he had 
carried the whole quantity of goods as far as the latter place; and if he had done so, there would be no danger of 
his bringing them back, as there is no probability that any person would carry goods that far merely for the purpose 
of fraudulently getting clear of the duty on them. 

This example, however, is stated merely to show that the proposed indulgence could be safely given by the Gov- 
ernment to a certain extent at least; and, as far as it could be so given, it would certainly be attended with beneficial 
consequences. I have myself matured no plan upon the subject; but I suppose the drawback might be safely and 
advantageously allowed upon all goods exported from certain points on the Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois rivers; 
and the points that I should recommend would be the mouth of Rock river, on the Mississippi; Fort Osage, on the 
Missouri; and Fort Clarke, on the Illinois; at each of which places I presume an Indian agent will be continued, so 
that this plan could be effected without the expense of any additional agencies. 

If the present plan of the Government should be abolished, and either of those which I have the honor to re- 
commend substituted in its place, I have no doubt that we shall soon see the fur trade floating exclusively in the 
channels which nature seems to have prepared for it. Being, however, sensible of my own want of information 
upon the subject, and believing that no man in America was better qualified to decide upon the best plan of con- 
ducting that trade than Colonel Chouteau, who has pursued it in this country for forty years with such success as to 
have amassed an immense fortune by it, I took the liberty of asking, and readily obtained, his opinion in writing, 
which I have the honor herewith to transmit for your consideration. 

Very respectfully, sir, vour most obedient servant, 

NINIAN EDWARDS. 

The Hon. William H. Ckawpord, Secretary of War, Washington City. 



The new method of conducting the Indian trade, for several years past, is the cause of a considerable diminu- 
tion in the fur trade of the Missouri and Illinois Territories. The Government of the United States thought that, 
by establishing a system of factories, they would supply all the tribes of Indians, to their satisfaction, with all kinds 
of goods necessary for their consumption, at such low prices that by these means they would get all the furs and 
pelts of the Indians, and at the same time would also get their confidence, esteem, and fidelity. But, unhappily, 
this generous system has had a contrary effect. The diminution of the Indian proceeds, on the one part, and the 
diminution also of esteem and fidelity in almost all the tribes of Indians towards us in the late war, prove incon- 
testabiy that the system of factories is not at all proper to conciliate the esteem of the Indians, and less so to obtain 
in the fur trade a preference over the strangers. 

This kind of trade and the trade among whites are entirely different, and to consider them analogous would be 
erring considerably. It requires on the part of the trader a complete knowledge of the Indian customs, characters, 
habits, wa}' of living, hunting, &c., to form his plans to trade with them, without which one will always err and fall 
from errors to errors. 

The factories, such as they are now established, are trading-houses fixed at certain points under the protection 
of a fort, and more or less distant from the Indian villages. Though living at a considerable distance from those 
houses, Indians are obliged to go to them to trade. They get in exchange for their furs goods at a reasonable 
price, (however, the difference with strangers is only in powder, rifles, calicoes, saddles, wampum, and a few other 
articles.) 

These factories never sell on credit,* whereas, for many years past, Indians have been accustomed to buy in 
that way, as well from the traders of these two Territories as from the British. The credits are actually indispen- 
sable, because the hunting grounds .being further than they formerly were, and Indians being obliged to go more 
than 300 miles from their villages to hunt, if they have not a sufficient quantity of furs to buy their winter goods, 
they miss their hunt, because it is too hard for them, once on the hunting spot, to return in winter to the factories, 
through snow and frost, to trade for whatever they want to continue their hunt; and what stops them the most is, 
the fear of leaving their families alone, exposed to war parties from the other tribes that are constantly going about 
in the winter season; and themselves, in going to the factories, are exposed to fall into the hands of their enemies: this 
having already been the case. 

The great advantages that the British traders have obtained over the factories on the Mississippi are very well 
known; but to give an idea of them, I will suppose four British traders going to trade with a certain tribe of In- 
dians; these four traders will certainly be in competition one against the other, and every one of them will try to 
do the best business; to do which they will carry with them what the Indians love the best in every way, and open 
their stores in the village of that tribe. Does it start to hunt, they follow it by water from 150 to 200 miles, until 
the place where it stops to go in the interior of the lands. There the traders build houses, and a part of the Indians 
ther cabins or lodges. Each Indian hunter buys on credit, sometimes to the amount of $200, according to his rep- 
utation. Each trader does his best to sell on credit to those hunters, because it Is a custom with the Indians that 
a family who has obtained goods on credit sells all its furs to the man who has advanced those goods. When the 
Indian hunters have left the river shore and are on their hunting ground, soon after, the traders try their best to get 

♦Partial credits are given at the factories.— /oAn Mason, Superintendent of Indian Jffairs. 



1816.] TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 67 

the furs of those Indians that have not bought on credit; to do that, they send in every direction, to the places fixed 
upon by the Indians to hunt, men with fanc)' goods. These men or engages carry those goods on their shoulders 
throuoii frost and snow, and do whatever is in their power to trade for the furs of those Indians that have not bought 
on credit from their employers or bourgeois, (it is what the Indian traders call running a deouine.) I have gone 
through this long detail about the British traders, to show all the pains and means they make use of to obtain Irom 
the Indians their furs, and that, if we want to go into competition with them, we must do the same; for to be stable 
on a certain fixed point is giving positively to the strangers all kind of advantages in this kind of trade. 

In the event of the abolition of the factories, the first inquiry that naturally presents itself is, what is to be substi- 
tuted in place of them? Upon this subject, I must, in the first place, refer to a publication in the Ohio Navigator, 
which was written by me in 1805, and published in 1811, folio 268, and was the result of fifteen years' observation 
and experience by myself. In that publication it will be seen that the Missouri only gave annually at that time an 
amount of $77,971. The same produce would fetch now at least one-third more, on account of the diflerentc in 
prices; add to this sum the proceeds of the following rivers, St. Peter's, Red, Crow's Wing, and a great many more 
of the Mississippi that are not comprehended in the observations of 1805, then the sale of furs and peltries could be 
safely estimated annually (independent of the proceeds of all the trade with the Indian tribes of the Missouri above 
the Mahas and Poncas) at §150,000 at least. 

To obtain all these furs. Government ought to establish at St. Louis a store, with a capital of about $100,000, 
which ought to be augmented according to the augmentation of the trade. That store ought to be furnished with all 
kinds of goods suited lo the Indian trade, well assorted in quality and quantity, and the articles in proportion to the 
sum. These goods ought to be selected on the notes of a man who understands perfectly well the Indian trade, 
and who should also know exactly what suits every nation in particular. 

That store, so established, could equip (without exclusive privilege) for the present about twenty-five or thirty 
traders for the Missouri, Mississippi, und all the rivers that empty in these two. But to enable those traders so 
equipped to enter into competition with the British traders. Government ought, as much as possible, to sell these 
goods at a very moderate advance, and take their furs and peltries at a reasonable price. By these means Govern- 
ment would employ its capital to the advantage of its citizens, to the annoyance of British traders, and I am bold to say 
it is the only means to destroy the British trade; besides which, our two Territories would be greatly benefited thereby. 

Twenty-five or thirty traders would employ about two hundred men. The necessary expenses of shipping, and 
some other expenses, would produce the circulation of a trading medium in the country. Add lo these the advantage 
of forming voyageurs fit for those sorts of voyages, which, by the bye, will certainly be of great consequence. 

In the above notes I have not mentioned the Indian tribes which live above the Mahas and Poncas; these are 
the Sioux, divided in several tribes and under diflerent names, the Arickaras, Mandans, Gros Ventres (Big Bellies,) 
Pieds Noirs (Black Feet,) and a great many others who are little known that inhabit the forks of the Missouri; and 
particularly those of the leftside, which are very near the trading-houses of the Northwest Company of Canada: as 
to those of the right fork, on which there is a fall, known only since the voyage of Captains M. Lewis and William 
Clark, their journal can be consulted. The trade with those tribes cannot be made with any advantage but by a 
company well organized, and which could dispose annually of about $50,000 in goods, of which sum the company could 
not expect any good returns before the expiration of three years, that time being necessary to go to and examine 
the country, build forts on the places which would be thought convenient, make friends, and open the trade with 
those diflerent tribes. I dare give here my decided opinion, which is founded on premises that I believe just, that 
a company well conducted, which should have the Indian trade (not exclusively) from Cedar island, above the Pon- 
cas, to all the forks of the Missouri, could bringdown annuall}', (once well established,) from that extent of country, 
a considerable sum in furs and pelts, which could be estimated at more than $200,000. This sum will appear exag- 
gerated, but I found my opinion on the returns of the Northwest Company of Canada, which, though not well known, 
on account of the profound silence they have kept on this subject, have been thought, through the observations of 
knowing men, to be at least £200,000 sterling; and this sum is principall}' got by the trade carried on with (hoso 
tribes of Indians that reside in the neighborhood of the branches on the left side of the Missouri. To arrive at those 
trading places, that company incurs very great expenses, which are occasioned by the difficulty of the roads, being 
obliged to carry their goods in very small bark canoes; and when there is no water, those goods are carried on men's 
shoulders. The greatest difficulty for them, and which occasions a very great expense, is the carriage of their pro- 
visions to the different forts they have on that part of the northwest. The proposed company would have a decided 
advantage over that of the Northwest, because it would be able to carry its goods wherever it would fix its forts, in 
large barges, which would save considerable time and expense, as well for sending up their goods and food as for 
bringing down their produce. It might yet establish easily a fort near the village of the Mandans, or any other 
place which might be thought proper, and there plant corn, potatoes, &c., which would diminish greatly the ex- 
penses of transportation, and even make whiskey, this liquor being indispensable in this kind of trade. With these 
advantages, added to many others, the proposed company must annoy and even destroy the Northwest Company; but 
whoever undertakes this trade may he sure that the Northwest Company will do any thing in its power, and even 
sacrifice large sums of money, to prevent that establishment. But if the agents of the proposed company, that would 
be at the head of the business in the neighborhood of the Northwest Company, should act prudently, and have engages 
that know well the trade, all the efforts of the Northwest Company would amount to nothing. 

The rnountains that are on the west side of the Missouri Territory offer riches more considerable than those of 
all the rest that have been mentioned, and the more advantageous, as there would be no competition on the part of 
any strangers. That country, covered by a great n)any Indian tribes, such as Laytanes, Rapahauts, Toquibacoux, 
and many others, wish and ask constantly to open a trade with us. But, unhappily, we have not yet capitalists and 
men of enterprise in these Territories; but we may hope that some will come, when this country will be well known, 
and when people will appreciate its great resources in riches that are immense, which time and the enterprise of 
our citizens cannot fail to develop. 



Sir: Indian Office, February 9, 1816. 

In obedience to the instructions of the President, I have prepared, in conformity to the resolution of the 
Senate of the United States, and have the honor to transmit j'ou herewith, a view of the trade carried on for public 
account with the several Indian tribes within the limits of the United States, during the four years preceding the 
spring of 1815. 

By the mode of accounting at this office, the returns of the agents are made quarterly, and the books are 
struck to conform with these dates. In order to avoid fractional calculation in furnishing balances, I have tiiken 
the liberty to make it commence on the Isl of April, (the beginning of a quarter,) instead of the 4th of March, 1811, 



68 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 1 42. 



as contemplated by the resolulion. Since the period embraced will be, within a very few days, the same, tiiere 
can be no perceptible difl'erencc in the result. 

The schedule marked Z refers to and gives the substance of each of the several papers of which this view is 
made up. In addition to an annual account of each of the trading-houses, and an annual account of the whole of the 
fndinn trade, and a general account of the same during the period before mentioned, as called i'or by the resolution, 
for the better understanding of the whole subject I have furnished a general account of each trading-house, and a 
statement showing the amount of property on hand, or of the capital stock as it stood on the 1st of April last. It 
necessarily happens that in a concern, the business of which is going on at so many different and distant points, 
the accounts cannot be struck at any given time without having resort in many of the items to estimate. This is 
particularly the case in the annual statements, inasmuch as, from the nature of this trade, the returns of an outfit 
cannot come in within the same year, and are often out more than two years. The results, however, may be con- 
sidered as nearly correct. 

It will be perceived by these statements that, in the year 1811, there were ten trading-houses in operation, and 
that in the beginning of 1815 there remained no more than six. Four, to wit, that at Michilimackinac, that at 
Chicago, that at Sandusky, and that at Fort Wayne, were broken up and destroyed by the enemy. To replace 
these, in part, during last fall two new bouses were fitted out, one to be located at Chicago, and one on Green bay 
of Lake Michigan. 

With great respect, I have the honor to be, sir, your verv obedient, humble servant, 

J. MASON. 

The Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



Z. 

Schedule exhibiting a condensed view of the United States Indian trade during the four years preceding the 31st 
of March, 1815, as shown in detail by the documents enumerated below, and filed herewith. 



Paper A, and accompanying abstracts from A a to A g; show the state of the trading fund as it stood 

on the 31st of March, 1815, to have been capital on hand, - - - - 

Whole capital originally vested by Congress in this trade, - - . . 

Diminution of capital since the commencement of the establishment, . . . 

Diminution of capital on the 3Ist of December, 1809, as shown in the report of the superintendent of 

Indian trade to the Senate of 12tii of April, 1810, - . . . 

Diminution on the 3Ist of March, 1815, as above, . . . . . 

The fund better on the 31st of March, 1815, than on the 31st of December, 1809, by - 
Lost by the British and Indians, by seizing and burning several of the factories, as shown in abstract 
F m of account F, ------ - 

Gained in trade between the 31st of December, 1809, and the 31st of March, 1815, 

Paper B, first annual account of the whole trade, shows the result of the trade at nine trading-houses, 
from the 31st of March, 1811, to the 1st of April, 1812, gain. 

Abstracts from B « to B i show the result of the trade at each of the houses during the same year. 

Paper C, second annual account of the whole trade, shows the result of the trade of nine trading- 
houses, from 3lst of March, 1812, to the 1st of April, 1813; the accounts of four of these houses for 
losses, in whole or in part, by destruction of the enemy, being brought in this year, loss, 

Abstracts from C a to C i show the result of the trade and losses by the enemy of each of the trading- 
houses during the same year. 

Paper D, third annual account of the whole trade, shows the result of the trade, &c. of seven tra- 
ding-houses, from the 31st of March, 1813, to the 1st of April, 1814, gain, - - - 

Abstracts D a to D g- show the result of the trade and losses by the enemy during the same year of 

each of these houses. 
Paper E, fourth annual account of the whole trade, shows the result of the trade of six trading-houses, 

from the 31st of March, 1814, to the 1st of April, 1815, gain, - - - - 

Abstracts E a to E/show the result of the trade at each of these trading -houses during the same year. 

Paper F, a general account of the whole trade, show the result of the operations of all the trading- 
houses duringa period of four years, between the 31st of March, 1811, and the 1st of April, 1815, 
gain in trade, .-..--. 

Loss by destruction of property by the British and Indians during the war, - - - 

Nett gain, 

Papers G, H, I, K, L, M, N, 0, P, Q, being a recapitulation of the annual results of the trade of each 

trading-house for these four years, show the gain or loss of these trading-houses, respectively, 

from the 31st of March, 1811. to the 1st of April, 1815; by which it will be seen that, during that 

period, the trading-house at Chickasaw Bluft's gained . - . . 

Ditto, at St. Fort Stephen's (Choctaw) lost 

Ditto, at Des Moines gained . . - - - 

Ditto, at Osage gained . . . . . 

Ditto, at Natchitoches gained - - ' - 

Ditto, at Chicago lost ....-- 

Ditto, at Michilimackinac lost . . . - 

Ditto, at Sandusky lost . _ . . - 

Ditto, at Fort Hawkins lost - . . - - 

Ditto, at Fort Wayne lost . . - - - 



$■261,368 09 
290,000 00 



28,631 91 



44,538 36 
28,631 91 



15,906 45 
43,369 61 



59,276 06 



4,782 93 



30,472 12 



3,832 13 



34,284 93 



55,797 48 
43,369 61 



10,241 


58 


82 


55 


12,739 


88 


14,282 


90 


12,003 


37 


11,503 


31 


11,486 


27 


8,053 


44 


380 


88 


5,333 


46 



Note.— In the losses shown at Chicago, Sandusky, Michiliinackinac, Fort Wayne, and Des Moines, are included 
the losses occasioned by the destruction by the enemy. 



1816.] TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 69 



The office of Accountant of the War Departtneot was established under the act of 8th May, 1792. The 
duties of the Accountant were the settlements of all accounts relative to the pay of the army, the subsistence of offi- 
cers, bounties to soldiers, expenses of the recruiting service, and the incidental and contingent expenses of the War 
Department. All purchases for supplying the army with provisions, clothing, supplies in the quartermaster's de- 
partment, military stores, Indian goods, and all other supplies or articles for the use of the War Department, were 
directed to be made by the Treasury Department, and the accounts were rendered to that Department, and were 
settled by the Recounting officers, without any agency of the Accountant. 

The business of the Accountant's office was confined to the duties prescribed by the act of the 8th May, 1792, 
until the year 1798. On the 16th July of that year, Congress passed " An act to alter and amend the several acts 
for the establishment and regulation of the Treasury, War, and Navy Departments," by which the duties hereto- 
fore performed by the accounting officers of the Treasury Department, in relation to the settlement of the accounts 
for supplying the army with provisions, clothing, supplies in the quartermaster's department, military stores, Indian 
goods, and all other supplies or articles for the use of the War Department, were annexed to those of the Account- 
ant, making it his duty to settle accounts of every description growing out of the military service of the United 
States, agreeably to the estimates and appropriations for the military establishment, and also for the Indian depart- 
ment, including the Indian annuities. 

By the act of the 3d March, 1809, "further to amend the several acts for the regulation of the Treasury, War, 
and Navy Departments," the duties of the Accountant's office were further increased, by reason of the forms pre- 
scribed for keeping and rendering the accounts of the War Department. An additional set of books for the appro- 
priations, and also one for the expenditures, were directed to be kept in the Accountant's office. In the former, 
accounts of the appropriations made annually are kept under each specific appropriation, showing the moneys drawn 
from the Treasury, and their application, annual statements of which are rendered to Congress. In the books of 
expenditure, separate accounts are kept with eyery receiver of public money, under each specific appropriation, out 
of which the money is advanced, and separate accounts are required to be rendered by each agent or receiver of 
public money, under every specific appropriation, out of which moneys are advanced to them. Hence, the number 
of personal accounts and separate settlements is multiplied to a very great extent. Formerly, (that is, prior to this 
act,) every agent or receiver of public money rendered but one account, and had but one settlement, whether he 
received money under one or more appropriations; now, it frequently occurs that the commissaries, quartermasters, 
paymasters — in short, all disbursing agents — have from two to six, and some more, accounts open on the books; and 
every recruiting officer has at least two accounts on the books, which require separate settlements under each. 
Other duties are required of the Accountant under the same law, which consume much time, and occasion great 
labor, particularly when the expenditures of the Department have extended the number of accounts to what they 
are at present. The annual list of outstanding balances required to be laid before the Comptroller of the Treasury 
may be mentioned; and when the open accounts on the books of the Accountant exceed five thousand, some esti- 
mate may be formed of the labor and difficulty incident thereto. Without, therefore, going any further into the 
details of the duties of the Accountant's office, it may be safely stated that some alteration has become necessary 
to meet the present state of public business. It is, accordingly, recommended that a division of the duties of the 
Accountant be made, and that an additional accounting officer be appointed, to be charged with the performance 
of such part of them as may be prescribed by law, leaving the residue to be performed by the Accountant. By an 
arrangement of this kind, the business of each office will be placed within the reasonable bounds of punctual per- 
formance. The great mass of unsettled accounts, as well those already deposited in the several offices of the War 
Department, and remaining unsettled, as those unliquidated in every part of the country, and those about to be pro- 
vided for by Congress, will be settled within a reasonable period, and in a manner calculated to secure the public 
interest in their adjustment. Without some arrangement of this kind, it will be impracticable to meet the public 
business; and the consequent delays in the settlement of the public accounts, particularly those of paymasters, quar- 
terjnasters, and other agents, whose disbursements have been to a large amount, will operate greatly to the preju- 
dice of the public interest. 

There is another part of the present system, in relation to the accounts of the War Department, which it is 
thought may be altered with advantage to the public interest; and, with a view of elucidating that part, it is neces- 
sary again to resort to the act of the 8th May, 1792, establishing the Accountant's office. In that act, it is directed 
that the Accountant shall report all settlements made by him, from time to time, to the accounting officers of the 
Treasury, for inspection and revision. The accounts are accordingly settled by the Accountant, the balances are 
paid, and thereafter quarter-yearly sent to the Treasury, accompanied by statements in detail, embracing all the 
transactions of the office in relation to the moneys received and expended. These statements have grown to an 
extent, in consequence of the increased expenditures in the War Department, so as to cause, in their preparation, 
a great consumption of time and much labor. The accounts and vouchers settled being sent out of the office, and 
filed at the Treasury, is also an inconvenience, because it very generally happens that, on the settlement of an offi- 
cer's or agent's account, the previous settlement becomes necessary; this must be sent for to the Treasury, and 
cannot always be had: hence delay in the business of the office. But the principal objection to this part of the 
system is, the labor it occasions in preparing the accounts for revision; notwithstanding which, the object to be 
efiected by it does not appear of sufficient importance to justify its continuance. The accounts are never revised 
nntil months after they have been settled, the balances paid, and the claimant acquitted of his responsibility. If, 
therefore, errors or improper allowances should be discovered, the difficulty of correcting the one, or altering the 
other, must appear obvious: hence the insufficiency of the revision at the Treasury. It is, therefore, thought the 
more advisable that an officer should be appointed in the War Department to act as Comptroller, whose duty it 
should be to revise the accounts settled by the Accountant, before the balances are paid, or the accounts considered 
finally settled. This would supersede the necessity of sending the accounts to the Treasury for revision, would be 
the means of keeping in each office the accounts settled in it, and remove all the difficulties incident to the revision 
at the Treasury. It would also be the means, it is conceived, of securing the public interest, by withholding the 
payment of money until the accounts had received every check necessary to an accurate settlement. It might also 
be made this officer's duty to perform such other acts, as far as they are applicable in relation to the War Depart- 
ment, as the Comptroller of the Treasury now performs in relation to that Department; and the same officer might 
be clothed with power to decide on accounts not specifically provided for by law, and which now are referred to 
the Secretary of War, to the great interference with his other duties. In short, the appointment of a Comptroller 
for the War Department would be the means of concentrating in that Department the whole responsibility grow- 
ing out of its receipts and expenditures, and of relieving the officers of the Treasury Department of a branch of 
duty which must very materially interfere with the performance of their other high and important duties. 



70 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 142. 

Z 2. 

Sir: Indian OrricE, March 6, 1816. 

I had the honor to receive yesterday your letter of the 4th instant, in which I am requested to furnish you 
with my views of the expediency of continuing the Indian trade as now established; of the modifications which it 
would be proper to introduce into that system at this time; of the increase of capital which is necessary to the sup- 
ply of the numerous tribes within our limi(s; and of the alterations, if any, that should be made in the system of 
licensing private traders. 

As to the first three objects of inquiry, I respectfully offer the opinion that it would not be expedient at this time 
to abolish the present system of trade on public account, but that it should be continued, with some modifications 
and an increase of capital. 

However desirable it may be to relinquish ultimately to individuals all the trade with the Indians, it is believed 
that this cannot yet be done with propriety. If it is the policy of the Government, as it is presumed certainly to 
be, no longer to permit any trade or intercourse to be held by foreigners with the Indians within our limits, it be- 
comes very questionable whether the amount of supplies heretofore furnished these in many parts of our territories 
by British traders can, within any short period, be substituted by .American traders, independently of public aid. If 
British traders are prohibited, and the supplies before obtained from them cannot be had by other means, it is very 
certain the Indians must suffer greatly, and that, besides the inhumanity of such a result, no circumstance could tend 
more to alienate them from this Government. The Indian trade is of a peculiar character, and requires certain 
associations of local information and habit on the one hand, and of capital and perseverance on the other, that cannot 
be at once matured in such manner as that it be carried on for private account in all the different sections of the 
country, to the necessary extent, in any short time. Again: it would be difficult, perhaps impossible, so to organ- 
ize a system of trade purely on public account, as that it should pervade the villages and the hunting camps of the 
numerous tribes within our limits, (a course, by usage, become indispensable,) without exposing the public funds 
engaged in it to too great risk of loss by its complexity, or from fraud in the numerous and distant subagencies which 
would thus, of necessity, be created. For these considerations, I would, with great deference, propose that the 
present capital in Indian trade (which may be considered to be now equal, or nearly equal, to the sum originally 
vested, to wit, $290,000,) be increased to $500,000; and that the superintendent of Indian trade be authorized, 
besides opening additional trading-houses at such convenient positions as may be directed by the President, to estab- 
lish a depot of supplies, duly assorted for the Indian trade, at some proper place, neighboring to the Indian country, 
as at St. Louis, equal in amount to about $150,000, to be furnished from time to time on credit for a reasonable 
term, but under strict regulations as to ultimate security and the character of the persons intrusted, to American 
traders, who should come under engagement to barter the goods so obtained at the villages and hunting grounds of 
such tribes as might be designated to them, respectively; these credits to be given out in moderate sums, propor- 
tioned to the means of the trader, and made reimbursable at the depot, in the furs and peltries received from the 
Indians, at fair prices, such as would at the same time support the public fund, and give sufficient encouragement to 
the adventurer. This part of the trade might be so regulated as to leave the public trading-houses, which are sta- 
tioned at some distance beyond the white settlements, to be resorted to by such of the Indians as should keep over 
the products of their hunts, and convey them thither, in order to obtain the best terms, while it supplied the less 
provident at their villages and hunting camps in quarters not frequented by American traders operating exclusively 
on their own resources. 

By these means, it is believed, a sufficient and proper supply of goods may be forthwith furnished all the Indian 
tribes on our borders, from sources independent entirely of foreign capital and foreign traders; and that, in the 
course of a few years, the public agencies may be withdrawn, and the whole trade laid open to individual enterprise, 
without injury to the political interests of the United States, or disregard to the condition of the Indians. 

In relation to the system of licensing private traders, I have no doubt that great abuses exist, and that altera- 
tions are requisite. In the first place, the penalties for trading with Indians without license are too light, and the 
forfeitures too easily evaded, to deter persons disposed to violate the law; and, in the next place, the Governors of 
Territories, and other agents authorized to issue licenses, are, as the existing provisions of the law on that subject 
have been construed, bound to give a license to any person whomsoever, foreigner or citizen, that can furnish 
security for $1,000. The result is, that our Indian countries are filled with persons hostile to the interests of the 
United States, and employed, in many instances, to excite animosities against our citizens and Government; or of 
desperate character, who are debasing the habits and destroying the health of the Indians, and at the same time 
cheating them of their little earnings, by constantly dealing out to them spirituous liquors. 

I beg leave to suggest, as a remedy for these evils, that it bo provided by law that no license to trade with the 
Indians within our limits be issued to any person not a citizen of and resident within the United States; and that 
the entire power to issue these be lodged with the President, through such agents and under such restrictions as he 
may from time to time direct. By this means the Executive will be at all times able so to regulate the private as 
well as the public trade as to insure from one or other of these sources a competent supply of goods in the different 
sections of Indian country. 

Anxious, sir, to make you, as requested, an early reply, I have hastily thrown together my ideas on the sub- 
ject of your letter; they have not, however, been recently formed, and have been derived from some experience in 
Indian affairs. I shall be much gratified if they prove in the slightest degree useful to the Government. 
Very respectfully, I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient servant, 

J. MASON. 

To the Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



Sir: Jeffersonville, Ind. T., October 4, 1815. 

Your communication of the 17th August came to hand. One year's annuities, which were for the year 1812, 
have been received b)' the then acting Governor, General Gibson, but none of them were disposed of as Govern- 
ment intended. General Gibson informs me that when General Hopkins reached Vincennes with his expedition 
against the Indians up the Wabash, he received an order from the general, which he conceived he was authorized 
to give, to deliver such articles out of the Indian annuities as might suit the militia under his command; that, 
agreeably to that order, all the blankets and other woollens were delivered, and he says an account kept, which 
account I have been endeavoring to procure to send on to your Department, but have not as yet been able to get it; 
this has been the cause of my delay in not acknowledging the receipt of your letter at an earlier period. Sundry 
of the goods have perished by damage in removing them from Vincennes to this place; what remained on hand 
when I took charge of the government of the Territory of Indiana amounted to about $800, and they a good deal 



1816.] TRADEANDINTERCOURSE. 71 

damaged. 1 have given out of them at diflerent periods, to friendly Indians, to the amount of $400; the balance are 
now on hand, but of such articles as are of trifling consideration. As soon as I can procure an account and state- 
ment of the goods delivered to General Hopkins's militia, I will forward it to your Department. As soon as the 
goods came into my hands, I wrote to the Secretary of War, and stated the situation of the goods, and suggested to 
him the propriety of making sale of them, but never received an answer. 

Accounts of all my transactions occasioned in expenditures with those Indians professing a friendly disposition 
have been transmitted to the Department of War. If any other statement than this should be thought necessary, 
please inform me. 

I am, with great respect, your obedient servant, 

TH. POSEY. 

P. S. The whole of the four years' annuities are due the Indians. 

Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



Sir: Jefpersonville, Indiana Territory, October 22, 1815. 

In my letter addressed to you of the 4th instant I mentioned having received of the Indian annuities, when I 
took charge of them, $800 worth; but, upon further investigation, I find the amount only to be $672 worth, $400 of 
which I made presents to the friendly Indians, leaving a balance of $272 agreeably to the charges in the original 
invoice, but the residue are so damaged and culled that they are worth very little. 

I have not received from Genera! Gibson, neither has he been able to procure, an exact account of the goods 
from General W. Johnston, whom he intrusted to deliver them to General Hopkins's militia; he informs me that he 
will make a statement, as far as he is able, and send it on to the Department of War. 
I am, with great respect, your obedient servant, 

TH. POSEY. 
Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War, 



Sir: Jeffersonville, October 22, 1815. 

Governor Posey handed me a letter, together with some resolutions of the Senate, from you directed to him, 
respecting Indian annuities. This was done by the Governor, I presume, because in the year 1812, after Governor 
Harrison left the Territory, its government fell under my direction, and, of course, the Indian annuities then on hand 
under my care. There were at that time at Vincennes annuities for the Kickapoos, Weas, and Piankeshaws, as per 
invoice, to the amount of $3,144 90. Having no warehouse either public or private, I put them under the immediate 
care of General W. Johnston, in whom I then had confidence, and who acted as my private secretary. Some time 
in the same year I received a letter from the War Department, dated September 17, directing me to distribute the 
goods to the best advantage to the militia and volunteers then protecting the frontier. In obedience to that direc- 
tion, I made distributions to a considerable amount, and directed an advance of twenty-five per cent, to be laid on 
the goods, to cover the expense of transportation, (fee, and that duplicate receipts should be taken and forwarded to 
your Department. This I did, expecting the amount would be deducted from the pay of the militia and volunteers. 
The receipts were enclosed to Mr. Eustis, then Secretary of War, but I never received an acknowledgment of their 
safe arrival; 1 presume, however, they are now on file in your Department. 

Immediately on the perusal of your letter to Governor Posey, I wrote to Mr. Johnston for an account of the 
annuities, as well those delivered the militia and volunteers as those then in his hands. In answer to my letter, 
he enclosed me the within account, (marked No. 1,) by which it would appear that the goods are all regularly 
accounted for. I cannot, however, refrain from remarking that the sum of $397 87J is an improper one, inas- 
much as that expense was defrayed out of a draft given the quartermaster, and which he has charged in his account; 
besides, the twenty-five per ceiit. adds to the amount charged to the different persons named in the account; that 
deducted will leave a considerable balance in the hands of Mr. Johnston, and for which he must be accountable. 
I am pretty well convinced that the account, when correctly and honestly stated, will stand as in the enclosed (marked 
No. 2;) and to that amount have I written to Mr. Johnston, urging on him, in as strong language as I could, the neces- 
sity of an immediate and correct settlement of the account, to which he has not as yet deigned to reply. Should I not 
receive an answer from him by to-morrow's mail, I will transmit to your Department a copy of the several accounts 
forwarded to me by Mr. Johnston, together with the vouchers, for whatever were delivered the Indians by my 
direction. 

You will observe in the account furnished by Mr. Johnston (a copy of which is herewith enclosed) a charge to 
myself of $86 50; those goods I hold myself responsible for at any moment I am called on; they were mostly 
retained by me for some militia who were not otherwise able to supply their necessities. The above amount is 
charged with the twenty-five per cent, advance. 

Such was ray situation as acting Governor of the Territory, that I was compelled to place confidence in some 
person; and all I have to regret is, that that confidence fell upon a man who shamefully abused it in almost every 
particular. 

I have the honor to be, with high consideration and respect, sir. 

Your most obedient, humble servant, 

JOHN GIBSON. 

The Hon, Secrbtary op War. 



72 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



No. 1. 

Memorandum of the Wea, Kickapoo, and Piankeshaw annuities which came to the care of General J. Gibson, 
in the year 1812, and how disposed of by him. 



Amount of invoice for the Weas. ....... 

Amount of invoice for the Kickapoos, ------ 

Amount of invoice for the Piankeshaws, ------ 

Amounts delivered the several militia officers in the years 1812 and 1813, viz: 

Brigadier General Hopkins, ------ 

Colonel Miller, .-.--.- 

Colonel Barbour, -- - - '- 

Colonel Wilcox, ------- 

Colonel Evans, .--..... 

Major Hughes, - - " . ' . " 

To different Indian prisoners whilst at Vincennes. and for fixtures on their going to Piqua, 

Due by General W.Johnston for moneys received. &c., after deducting his trouble in keeping accounts, 
and money advanced for freight. &c., $113 50, and by General Gibson, $86 50, 

Balance of goods delivered W. B. Prather, by order of Governor Posey, 



$1,150 00 


994 


94 


999 


96 


$3,144 


90 


$113 34 


359 


45,^ 


870 


53^ 


349 


78 


5 


93 


175 


57 


397 


89+ 


200 


00 


672 


40 


$3,144 90 



No. 2. 
Annuities for Kickapoos, Weas, and Piankeshaws. 



1812. 
Kickapoos, 
Weas, 
Piankeshaws, 



Dr. 



[The above account does not include any goods which may have been delivered the Indians. If 
any were delivered, vouchers must exist for them, and the account, of course, be credited therefor.] 

Cr. 

By amount delivered General Hopkins, exclusive of 25 per cent, advance, - - - 

By amount delivered Colonel Barbour, do. do. ... 

By amount delivered Colonel Miller, do. do. ... 

By amount delivered Colonel Wilcox, do. do. 

By amount delivered Major Hughes, do. do. ... 

By amount delivered Colonel Evans, do. do. 

By amount retained by General Gibson, &c., per letter, exclusive of 25 per cent, advance, 

By amount delivered Governor Posey, do. do. 

By amount in the hands of General W. Johnston, . . . . . 



$994 


94 


1,150 


00 


999 


96 


$3,144 90 


$90 


67 


696 


424 


287 


66^ 


279 


82.^ 


140 


45 


5 


93A 


68 


67 


672 


40 


902 


9(, 


$3,144 90 



Extract of a letter from the Secretary of War to General J. Gibson, dated 

Sir: War Department, September 17, 1812. 

Your letter of the 2d instant is received, and you are authorized to dispose of any goods within your control 
destined for the Indian tribes who are now hostile, and distribute them to the best advantage among the volunteers 
and militia who are marching to the protection of the frontier, keeping an account of the same. 



Sir: Detroit, October 16, 1815. 

I have the honor to state that no presents were issued to the Indians in this Territory, except a few from the 
quartermaster's department, the amount of which I have no means of ascertaining, between the period of my 
appointment, in 18] 3, and the month of August, 1814. 

In the months of August, September, October, November, and December, 1814, and January, 1815, goods to 
the amount of $11,312 61 were distributed in presents to the Indians at this place. 

But although these goods were distributed as presents, yet they were, in a considerable degree, rewards for 
services which had been rendered by the Indians. 

I am unable to state what presents' were issued antecedent to the period above mentioned. The data for that 
purpose can only be found in the War Office. 

I transmit an abstract showing the annuities due to all the Indian tribes north of the Ohio, and east of the Mis- 
sissippi. At what time any of these tribes received their last payment, I know not, nor have I any means of knowing. 

I have reason, however, to believe that those tribes whose annuities are payable at this place (namely, the Wyan- 
dots, Chippewas, Ottawas, and Pattawataraies) have received nothing since 1811; and that, consequently, four years' 
annuities are due to them. I need not again say how necessary it is that these debts should be discharged. 

I transmit an abstract showing the amount due here, presuming that no payment has been made to them since 
1811. 

Upon the subject of Indian affairs generally, I have nothing to add to the two letters I had the honor to forward 
to the War Department in July last in relation to them. 

Very respectfully, sir, 1 have the honor to be your most obedient servant, 

LEW. CASS. 

Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



73 



M — *: 


O 

o 














§ 






o 
o 



































■2 .- 






















o 























Oi 


Cl 




Hi 


«©. 














-" 






























c< 




^a^ 


















































Ol (__ 


















































ill 


















































1 














1 






' 










* 












1 


1 




r o '"' 


















































■^Q 


















































^ 




































































































5c^ 


















































5 JD 00 


















































1 














r 






1 










1 












1 






















































cS'- 




































































































i 

Is 

CB 00 

= o 
















^ 




• 












« CJ 




to 


i 


^ 


^ 


tT 


C • • 


o^ooc'fr ^ .\ 


1 














> 






1 










oT hccn 

1 1 " 


1 



>. 


J2 





c 


ill 

2 c.^ 


&"a^ bo— c .2— S 


^" 
















3 
















^ 


i 


t 


c 


3 


S S!-£ 


a ?. >,M ■" 3 £ c ■" 


is S3 
















_c 
















3 £ 




*^ 


2 


•^ 


;. 


c 


.S Si's 


f •° 


I 














o 






1 










*- 








1 


OJ 







."'nou-aogc c-g 


3 
















o 
















S 





c 


^ 







£r-.S^t55'3a|>.35 


t. 


sT 






























•S E 


-I: 


c 


c 







s e| =.^"0^3 






J3 

E . 


> 














' 






' 












3 




c. 



c 




"o ^ ^ > aj -5 :l 


1 




1 






























. io 

i 





1 


1 


'5 




-2 = 4) 






■g •-' 


c 
o 














, 






1 










"e 


b 


g 


^ 




S 1 




Q 


3 






























g = 


■5. 


!;> 







S S.S §-£5 = 


■*-' 






«& 






























«■" 












sa 






UD* fc. . 




































































































C J3 O 


















































g gco 


1 














1 
















1 














1 






















































ISo- 


















































>Q" 


















































^ 












































^ ■ 


^-• 




















































































































































^ s 


M 




X . 














































U • 




m ^ O 


1 














1 






1 










1 












.= ^ 


aH 




2 = 00 












































> 




o te- 












































s 


w 




S 3 












































° t. 


1» 




0<! 












































«a^ 




^ 3 


a 


c 

3 
■3 


3 

-3 
C 

c 






c 
o 


1 






o 

o 


> 

c 
'io 




5 


1 












1 


' 






ba 


i 


4) 


a: 


"^ 


s 


> 






o 




i 


D 


1 


(U 1 












1 


1 






H 




















«» 




























^ 








































































































































































































to 


1 














1 






1 










1 














1 






















































<•* 


















































o 


















































„-CD 




































































































c - 


















































cb- 


















































5 ct 


















































^ 


1 














t 






1 










r 












1 


1 






















































> 


















































' «■* 
















^ 




6 






























C 2 
















S 




r3 






























12 


1 














.2 


m 




t ' 










1 












1 


1 




















o 


4, O 


'E. 

K 




























CI 




































































































ho 


1 














' 






1 










1 












1 


1 




3 


















































<^ 


















































^•o 


















































S °o 


















































c '^ 


















































c 


















































y 


1 














, 






1 










, 












, 


, 


























































































































































> 


















































."O 


S 














Si 






.3 


















■ 




" 


_- 




<- 1, CT. 


.3 














3 






























'm 




O = J^ 














































a 






^.3 

C-9 












c'o 




to 


i 








gS 














_c 




4; 4t " ■» 


o 


3 












o 


o 
to 







> 








Q 




















f" O 3 


o 


ZD 












o 







^ 



























o 


c 












o 



































< 


















































(» 














^ 






«» 










««. 












«A. 


w. 




^' 


■ 














• 






■ 










=a 












s" 


















































1 






II 


•3 




















s 
1 










•=■0 












1 




1 
















Q 





























1 


1 





10 



74 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



FNo. 142. 



— ^ 














£ c 




o> 


o_ o_ 


■°'s 


-^ ^ 




'-I »-t 


« 










^ 




^o^ 












3 i. 




i^oj 


1 1 




1 1 


S6| 




j; 
,0 




>f 




-J- *.- 






«> 




L> 


||?|'S|ar|i 






Si 


11 illilll 

1 O0(L)>-*-'<urfOc: 


1 


1 1 

• 






1 1 


= 








> 


|S£-Si55^2S 


c 




o 


J "o 1 1 3 J: g 






,00 


^ 5 . ■£ ^ °^ 


1 


1 1 


(Si; 


" g ?; g.S >^| 1 






OT320.2 = S= 1 


1 


1 1 


c 


S-S^-^^gaS 






CO 


<©. 






iC 
























■i|fe 


1 1 


1 


1 1 


■j; 2°= 








5;'^ 








o 








Z 
















.o 






-3 




1 1 


" 


£10 1 


C OJ i-" 









>: " 









Q 






«> 












jz -5 






t: « 








C CM 










u y 






•2 *J >o 


.£ .- 


1 


r 1 


3 = CO 









o< 








•^ 








_>. 
















3 








Hi 
















b"" 








£0 
























■c 








c 


















1 ' 






c 

















fn 














1 ^ ..t« t, . 


hT 











1 1 


1 


e|l »5 S r 


si 

5 






.=-'§11 «o 


<^ .• 






g|!lli' 


c 


1 1 


1 


c 














> 






t©. 


-■* 








to 








aj 00 








c ^ 








c ^ 


1 1 


1 


1 1 


















.= bo 








t> = 








<1 
















si 


1 1 






= '-' 












-3 -j; 5; 2 -r 


c 


1 I 


1 


lfi.= iil 


> 






st- 


<.. *oi 


• 


■ 




= 1^ 








>."? "^ 








S §" 


§ 1 






















^. 


. 


t 


s 




i i 
1 1 




> 


B. 


1 1 




"u 






« ^ 


W 


■(£ W 



181G.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



75 



Abstract of annuities due to the Indian tribes, and payable at Detroit. 

If, as tliere is reason to believe, no payments have been made to them since 1811, then there is due to the 
Wyandots, --.---- $9,600 

Chippewas, ...... 7,200 

Ottawas, .-..--- 7,200 
Paltawataraies, ...... 7,600 

Although a part of these annuities is payable in goods, yet it would be more economical to the Government, and 
more satisfactory to the Indians, if these payments were made in cash; in that event, specie must bo forwarded here. 

LEW. CASS. 
Detroit, October 2\, 1815. 



Sir: 



St. Louis, September 20, 1815. 
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 17th of August, with resolutions of the 
Senate of the United States on the subject of Indian relations. 

Enclosed, herewith, is a statement of the annuities which have been delivered and are due to the tribes that have 
been placed under my superintendence during four years immediately preceding the 4lh of March, 1815; also, a 
view of \\ie presents delivered to the Indian chiefs and different, tribes within the same time. 

I will, by the next mail, or by Lieutenant Kennerly, who sets out in a few days with the Indian treaties, give 
yon my views and observations upon the several questions presented in the last paragraph of the resolution in as 
concise a manner as I can; and shall procure from some of the best-informed gentlemen of this quarter, who have 
been long acquainted with Indian trade, habits, &c., their views of Indian trade and intercourse, which I will take 
the liberty of enclosing to you. 

I have also taken the liberty of enclosing to you a l^st of the agents and interpreters in the service of the. United 
Slates and under my superintendence; a list of the nearest Indian tribes in this Territory, and west of Lake Michigan, 
exhibiting their numbers; and a list of the probable number of agents and interpreters to complete the system of 
agency, should it be continued. 

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of high respect, your most obedient, humble servant, 

WM. CLARK. 
The Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



An account of the annuities and presents due, paid, and delivered to the respective Indian tribes under the agency 
and superintendence of William Clark, Governor of Missouri Territory, during four years antecedent to the 
ith of March, 1815, specifying the dates when the same were due, and when they were paid and delivered. 





ANNUITIES. 








Indian an- 












nuities, 


Am't de- 


Am't 


Am't of pre- 


Names of tribes. 


Date of delivery, or when due. 


By whom delivered. 


when due 


livered. 


due. 


sents ma 


de 














to Indians. 








1810. 


$1,000 


. 


. 




Big Osage, 


Delivered Sept. 25, 1811, 


George C. Sibley, factor. 


1810, 


500 


- 


- 




Little Osage, 


DeliveredSept. 25, 1811, 


George C. Sibley, factor. 


1811, 


600 


- 


- 




Sac, 


Delivered Sept. 7, 1812, - 


Nicholas Boilvin, agent. 


1811, 


400 


- 


- 




Fox. 


Delivered Sept. 7, 1812,- 


Nicholas Boilvin, agent. 


18U. 


1,000 


- 


- 




Big Osage, 


Delivered Sept. 26, 1811, 


George C. Sibley, factor. 


1811, 


500 


- 


- 




Little Osage, 


Delivered Sept. 26, 1811, 


George C. Sibley, factor. 


1812, 


1,000 


- 


- 




Big Osage. 


Delivered Nov. 24, 1813, 


George C. Sibley, factor. 


1812. 


500 


- 


- 




Little Osage, 


Delivered March 4, 1813, 


George C. Sibley, factor. 


1812, 


600 


- 


- 




Sac, 


Delivered Nov., 1812, - 


To the chiefs. 


1812. 


400 


. 


- 




Fox, 


Delivered Nov., 1812, - 


To the chiefs. [agents. 


1813. 


600 




- 




Sac. 


Delivered Sept., 1813, - 


Messrs. Johnson and Blondeau, 


1813, 


400 


- 


- 




Fox, 


Delivered Sept., 1813, - 


.Mr. Johnson, at St. Charles. 


1813, 


1,000 


- 


- 




Big Osage. 


Delivered Nov. 24, 1813, 


George C. Sibley, agent. 


181.3, 


500 


- 


. 




Little Osage, 


Delivered Nov. 24, 1813, 


George C. Sibley, agent. 


1814. 


1.000 




- 




Big Osage, 


Delivered Sept., 1814, - 


Peter Chouteau, agent. 


1814, 


500 








Little Osage, 


Delivered Sept.. 1814, - 


Peter Chouteau, agent. 


1614, 


- 


600 


- 




Sac, 


Delivered Nov. 3, 1814, - 


Since delivered to the fiiendly 
part of this tribe. 


1814, 


- 


400 


- 




Fox, 


Delivered Nov. 3, 1814, - 


Since delivered to the friendly 


1811, 


- 


- 


$1,036 79 


To sundry tribes 




part of this tribe. 












in Missouri Ter., 


In the year 1811, 


By order of William Clark. 


1811, 


- 


- 


3,266 


00 


Mississippi tribes. 


In the year 1811, 


Nicholas Boilvin, agent. 


1812, 






7,794 


48 


Chiefs of several 
tribes, - 


In the year 1812, 


By order of Secretary of War, 
to chiefs on a visit to the Pre- 
sident. 


1812, 


" 


" 


812 


91 


To sundry tribes, 


In the year 1812, 


By order of Wm. Clark, princi- 
pal agent. 


1813, 


- 


- 


1,079 


73 


To sundry tribes, 


In the year 1813, 


By order of Wm. Clark, prin- 
cipal agent. 


1814, 






11,847 


58 


Missouri tribes, - 


In the year 1814, 


By order of Wni. Clark, to 
counteract British influence, 
and set them at war, &c. 


1815, 


To 4th 


Mar. 


332 


62 


Missouri tribes, - 


In the year 1815, 


By order of W"m. Clark, prin- 
cipal agent 














«10,500 


$1,000 


$26,770 


11 









WILLIAM CLARK. 



76 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



A list of Indian agents and interpreters employed in the service of the United States in the Territories of Missouri 

and Illinois. 



Names of agents and inter- 
preters. 



Agents and interpreters- 
salary per annum. 



The nation or tribe for whom agents are appointed. 



Peter Chouteau, 


$1,200, 


Nicholas Boilvin, 


1,200, 


Manuel Lisa, - 


548, 


Maurice Blondeau, 


800, 


Thomas Forsyth, 


800, and 2 rations. 


Col. P. Menard, 


600, and 2 rations. 


Major Win. Lovely, 
Aug. P. Chouteau, 
Judge Bullett, 


- 


Interpreters, 
Samuel Solomon, 
Hypolite Bolon, 
John A. Cameron, 
Lewis Dorion, 
Paul Louis, - 
Noel Mograine, 


548. 
305, and 1 ration, 
365, 
365, 
365, 
365, 



Agent for Great and Little Osages; he visits the nation frequently; 
resides at St. Louis. 

Agent for the tribes above Illinois river, on the Mississippi; re- 
sides at Prairie du Chien. 

Agent for the tribes on the Missouri above the Kanzas; greater 
part of his time with the tribes; resides at St. Louis; has been 
of great service in preventing British influence the last year by 
sending large parties to war. 

Siibagent for Sacs and Foxes; resides with the friendly Sacs and 
Foxes on the Missouri; (a half-Indian of influence.) 

Agent for the Indians of Illinois river; resided at Fort Clarke, 
and latterly at St. Louis; has rendered the most essential 
service. 

Agent for the Shawanees, Delawares, and Peorias, and Pianke- 
shaws; resides on the Mississippi, nearly central. 

Agent for the Cherokees on Arkansas. 

Subagent, for special purposes, with the Osages. 

Subagent on the Arkansas. 



Interpreter, translator, &c., St. Louis. 

Interpreter for several Indian languages; resides at St. Louis. 
Interpreter for the Sioux; part of his time with the bands. 
Interpreter for the loways and Sacs; resides with the loways. 
Interpreter for the Usages; resides at St. Louis. 
Interpreter for the Osages, and resides with them. 



No nation or tribe of Indians residing within the Missouri Territory, except those who live amongst the white 
settlements, and the Mandans remain at their villages four months in the year, and many of the bands go to the 
distance of two and three hundred miles. 



A list of the nearest Indian tribes in Missouri Territory and west of Lake Michigan, as computed at this time, 

September 20, '[815. 





Number of 


Total num- 


The direction the tribes 


Place of residence, or watercourse on which the tribes 


Names of tribes. 


warriors m 
each tribe. 


ber of souls 

in eacli 

tribe. 


reside from St. Louis. 


rove. 


Quapaws, - 


200 


800 


South, - 


Near the post of Arkansas. 


Cherokees, 


1,000 


5,000 


S. W. by south, - 


On the Arkansas and White rivers, by permission 
of the General Government. 


Piankeshaws, 


40 


200 


South, - 


On the St. Francis, below the settlements. 


Shawanees, 


300 


1,200 


South and west, - 


On Apple creek, near Cape Girardeau, and on 
the Merrimack river. 


Delawares, 


150 


500 


South, - 


On White river and Merrimack river. 


Peorias, - 


10 


40 


South, - 


On the St. Francis river. 




1.700 


7,740 




The Great and Lit- 








tle Osages, 


1,500 


6,000 


Southwest, 


On the rivers Osag^; and Arkansas. 


Kanzas, - 


400 


1,600 


Southwest by west. 


On the Missouri and Kanzas rivers. 


loways, - 


250 


1,000 


West, - 


On Missouri and Grand rivers. 


Ottoes, - 


300 


1,200 


West, - 


On Missouri and river Platte. 


Pawnees, - 


1,200 


6,000 


West, - 


On Missouri and river Platte. 


Mahas, - 


400 


2,000 


West, - 


On Missouri. 


Poncas, - 


100 


400 


West, - 


On Missouri. 


Chehaws, - 


500 


2,000 


Northwest by west. 


On Missouri. 


Arickaras, 


750 


3,000 


Northwest, 


On Missouri. 


Seven bands Sioux, - 


2,000 


8,000 


W. to northwest, - 


On both sides of the Missouri river. 


Sacs and Foxes of 










Missouri, friendly. 


200 


800 


W. to northwest, - 
North, - 


On both sides of the Missouri river. 




7,600 


32.000 




Sacs. 


800 


3,200 


Two miles up Rocky river, Illinois Territory. 


Winnebagoes, 


600 


2,400 


N. andN. E.byN. 


On Rockjr river, and above Prairie du Chien, 

Illinois Territory. 
On Ouisconsin and Green bay. 


Menomonies, W. 0. 


400 


1,600 


North-northeast, - 


Foxes, 


300 


1,200 


North, - 


On Mississippi, below Prairie du Chien, M. T, 


Sioux, 


2,000 


8,000 


N. and N. N. W. 


On Mississippi and river St. Peter's, Michigan 
Territory. 


Chippewas, 


- 


- 




On the Mississippi, high up; (numerous.) 




4.100 


16,400 





1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



77 



LIST — Continued. 



Names of tribes. 


Number of 
warriors in 
each tribe. 


Total num- 
ber of souls 
in eacli 
tribe. 


The direction the tribes 
reside from St. Louis. 


Place of residence, or watercoiu'se on which the tribes 
rove. 


Cliippewas, 
Pattawatamies, 
Kickapoos, 
Kaskaskias, 


200 

1,200 

400 

15 


800 

4,800 

1,600 

(iO 


Nortlivvest, 
Nnrtlieast by east, - 
Eastward ly. 
South, 


Between Milwalky and Green bay. 
On the Illinois river, &c. 
On the heads of Kaskaskia river. 
At Kaskaskia. 




1,815 


7,260 





NoTK. — 'l"he tribes high up the Missouri and the wafers of tlie rivers Pl#itte, Kanz.as, Arkansas, and Red river, 
of the south; and no.-th, in Michigan Territoiy; and those east of a line from Lake Michigan to Vincennes on the 
Wabash, are not included. 



To give full effect to the system of Indian agency, this Territory, and the country on the Illinois river, and be- 
tween that and Lakes Superior and Michigan, would most probably require, independent of a principal superintend- 
ent in this quarter, and his clerk, the following agents and interpreters, with what may be considered as adequate 
salaries. 



One principal agent for the Missouri tribes above the Osage, . . . 

One subageat for the Missouri tribes above the 0,*age, - . - - 

Two interpreters for the Missouri tribes above the Osage, 8400 each, 

One principal agent for the Osages, -..--. 

One subagent for the loways and Kanzas, (the Osage factor has acted as agent,) 

Three interpreters for the loways and Kanzas, $400 each, . . . 

One principal agent at Prairie du Chien, salary $1,200 or - - - - 

The factor, as agent, as usual, ...... 

One agent for Sacs and Foxes of Mississippi, - . . . . 

One principal agent for the Sioux of the rivers Mississippi and St. Peter's, 

One subagent for the VVinnebagoes and Wild Oats of Fox river, $800 or - 

Four interpreters for the Mississippi tribes, $400 each, . . - . 

One principal agent for the Pattawatamies of Illinois river, . . . 

One subagent for the Pattawatamies of Illinois river, . . . - 

Two interpreters for the Pattawatamie of Illinois river, $400 each, 

One principal agent for the Cherokees of Arkansas and White rivers, $800 or 

One subagent for the Quapaw tribe, . . - . . 

One subagent for the Shawanees, Delawares, Piankeshaws, and Peorias, 
Three interpreters at least for the several languages, for the superintendent of Indian 
attdirs, at about $300, $400, and $500 each, - - - - - 

Add to this the salary of the principal superintendent and his clerk. 



Salaries. 

$1,200 

800 

800 

1,200 

300 

1,200 

1,500 
300 
800 



1,200 

900 

1,600 

1,200 
800 
800 



1,000 
450 



$2,800 



2,600 



3,700 



2,800 



1,450 
750 



1,200 
$18,000 



Sir: St. Louis, October 1, 1815. 

By the last mail I had the honor of enclosing you a statement of annuities, presents due, paid, and delivered 
to the several Indian tribes under my superintendence, in conformity with a resolution of the Senate of the United 
States of the 4lh of March, 1815. 

On the subject of the .several questions presented in the last paragraph of the resolution, I beg leave to observe, 
there is not the smallest doubt in my mind but the present mode of managing our Indian relations ought to be ma- 
terially altered. Those relations are every day growing more and more imperfect; and the decided policy of Eng- 
land (so recently and clearly developed) of using the Indian tribes to vex and harass our frontier settlements in time 
of peace, and as active partisans in time of war, ought to admonish the Government of the United States to adopt 
a more efficient system of regulating our Indian concerns than has heretofore been in use. 

In answer to the first question of the latter paragraph of the resolution, " whether any alteration of the power 
and duties of the several officers and agents employed in the superintendence and management of Indian affairs 
would be advantageous'!" experience has taught us that the Indian agents should bo invested with more power, under 
the authority of the laws, to enable them to detect illicit trade; force from the Indian country improper characters; 
settle the disputes between the Indians and whites; prevent impositions, and enforce all the laws and regulations of 
Indian intercourse. 

It appears essential that the grade of Indian agency should be established in the different sections of country, 
from the general superintendent down to an interpreter. 

" Whether the consolidation of the whole care and management of the Indian relations, and the placing the same 
in a single department, would be expedient?" 

On this point 1 fear I am incapable of giving you a satisfactory view. It would appear reasonable, however, 
to state that the great number of Indian tribes within the bounds of the United States, differing very materially in 
disposition, habits, manners, customs, and trade, would require much care and attention, with a correct knowledge 
of the Indians, to produce any thing like system in the management of them. And on a first view of the subject, it 
appears to me to be necessary to place all Indian concerns, both political and comroercial, under the superintendence of 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. [xNo. 142. 



a separatR depnrtment; and, considering that trado is the great lever by which to direct the policy and conduct of 
the Indian tribes towards the United States, I have ever been of opinion that the agents for trade stationed by the 
United States among tiie Indians ought also to be incorporated with tlie agents for political intercourse. 

The third question is one of the most difficult to answer; the habits, dispositions, «fcc. of the whites as well as 
the Indians difiering so materially, as they do, in so vast a tract of country as the hounds of the United States. 

I have always been of opinion that some material changes were essentially necessary in the Indian trade. But 
to devise a plan by which that trade may be carried on with equal advantage to the Indian tribes, and more eco- 
nomical to the public, securing to the citizens the benefit of the Indian trade, without the exclusion of individuals, 
or giving to large companies a monopoly of Indian trade, is a subject which deserves more justice than I am able 
to bestow on it. 

I do not believe it would be expedient to hazard any material alteration for the present. The United States 
trading-houses, when well located and properly managed, are, beyond doubt, extremely useful; and, instead of be- 
ing expensive, (I am told,) are profitable to the Government. 

There being at this time no public trading-houses in the Indian country in this Territory, I find, by the present 
mode o( small coinpanies and individual traders, the tribes are not at this time all furnished with what they abso- 
lutely require. 

An alteration in our present system»of intercourse of a commercial nature with the Indians, so as to compel 
all trade with Indians to be carried on at convenient established points, and placed under the eye of authority, 
may answer very well for the neighboring tribes, and th.ose surrounded by our settlements, and would give facility 
in the humane policy of civilizing those tribes. 

This system, I fear, cannot be pursued with effect, for many years, with the numerous tribes of this Territoi v 
situated out of the settlements. But I am very inuch ijiclined to an opinion that a well-organized coinpany, with 
a large capital, and a liberal aid and protection from the Government, might be made much more efficient in man- 
aging the Indian aflTairs well than the present plan. But it must be a coinpany sufficiently poweiful to take in hand 
all the trade of the Missouri and Upper Mississippi, to carry into complete effect one great and general system, in 
co-operation with, and partly under, the direction of the Government. Its capital ought to be large, (say G00,000 
or 1,000,000 dollars,) and divided into small shares, (say 100 dollars each share, to enable the most indigent 
trader to become interested,) and could be subscribed, paid in, and managed very much in the manner usual among 
the commercial and banking companies throughout the United States. Perhaps it would be most expedient to con- 
fine at least three-fourths of the subscriptions to the western Stales and Territories, and it might probably be best 
to use a third or a fifth of the capital for banking purposes at St. Louis, (the most central, convenient, and commer- 
cial place.) 

A coinpany thus powerful would be able to furnish all the Indian tribes with the best of goods, and would, with- 
out doubt, sweep the whole of the valuable fur trade of the Missouri and Mississippi; expel all the petty (though 
now very powerful) British traders; and bring into our markets immense quantities of the most valuable furs and 
peltries. 

It would in a short time extend its influence and bear down all opposition among the most distant tribes. Its 
political influence should be purely American, directed in all respects, and at all places, with precisely' the same polic\', 
co-operating with the policy of, and keeping up a regular correspondence with, the Government. 

The company should stipulate with Government (for equivalent advantages) to maintain regular trading-houses 
at such places as the United States have agreed to fix and maintain similar establishments. 

An establishment of this sort would interest a vast number of our western citizens in the well-managing of our 
Indian affairs; it would attract the attention of enterprising Americans, and give employment to the most of our 
citizens who are accustomed to trade with the Indians, and bo the means of discovering and drawing forth for the 
use and comfort of our own country all the wealth with which this country abounds in furs, peltries, a variety of 
minerals, lead, salt, saltpetre, and also wool, tallow, and a great variety of valuable dying roots and drugs, hereto- 
fore only partially known. 

It would eflectually draw out and keep out that restless and deadly hostile influence that has been heretofore 
used so successfully among the Indians to our prejudice by the British traders and agents, and which is doubtless 
at this moment trying to fix itself firm enough to defy all our efforts to remove them, under the present system. 

A company such as I have been speaking of would be a combination of American capital and American tra- 
ders to draw out foreign traders who are intruding without permission, and to place the Indian relations more under 
the control and management of the Government, and reap for themselves the profits of a trade immensely valuable. 

I will not take up your time in going more in detail on this subject. 

Small companies are found, from experience, to produce no valuable change, and are soon compelled to give 
up the Indian trade. 

It would be unsafe to abandon the present system of trading-houses until a general system and combination of 
private enterprise is organized. Our own traders, acting in violent opposition to each other, (as they very com- 
monly do,) create nearly as much confusion and dissatisfaction among the Indians as foreign traders; and I have 
been under an impression that it was to counteract the fatal effects of such petty squabblers that Government first 
instituted public trading-houses. If they have not been generally useful, is it not because they are badly placed 
or badly managed? The system is unquestionably a good one, and, if its operations were less limited, it would be 
more efficient. 

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the highest respect, your most obedient, humble servant, 

WM. CLARK. 



The Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary nf War. 



Sir: St. Louis, October 10, 1815. 

Enclosed, herewith, I have taken the liberty of sending to you some notes which I have procured from 
Colonel Auguste Chouteau and Mr. Thomas Forsyth, on the subject of Indian commerce, &c. 

Colonel Chouteau is a very correct man of observation, and has been in the habits of Indian intercourse for 
nearly Jiftij years, a part of which time the greater part of the Indian trade of this country was conducted by him. 
[See his notes following Governor Edwards's letter of November, 1815, page 66.] 

Mr. Forsyth, at present an Indian agent for the Illinois river, has been long in the habits of trading with the 
Indians, and possesses a strong mind. 

I have the honor to be vour most obedient, humble servant, 

WM. CLARK. 
The Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



1816.] TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



Sir: St. Louis, September 22, 1815. 

In consequence of a conversation that took place a few days ago between your excellency and myself about 
Indian affairs, I now take the liberty to give you my opinion as respects the method we ought to pursue towards 
the Indians to gain their good-will and friendship, by which means we may be able to procure that necessary influ- 
ence over the different nations of Indians, wean them from foreign influence, and make the whole of them depend- 
ant on us; until which period we will always have llie Indians as enemies when we are enaaged in war wiih any 
of the European Powers. 

I have been often surprised on reflecting that we, as Americans, speaking the same language, having the sam? 
customs and manners, and having the same means as the British, should have so little influence over the Indian 
nations; from which it would appear to me that there is a want of something somewhere. 

According to the present method of treating the Indians, it is, in my opinion, utterly impossible to gain their 
good-will, or have any influence with them. It cannot be expected that a Governor, who is also superintendent of 
Indian affairs, (who, perhaps, never saw an Indian before he came to the Territory he is to govern,) can know 
what course to pursue towards the Indians, or, indeed, what instructions to give to an agent. 

Indians are always fond of novelty, and when they hear of the arrival of a Governor, they post off to visit their 
new father. 

The Governor, perhaps, not paying that attention to his visitants that they expected, the Indians return homo 
much disappointed, saying that "their new father is a man of no sense, and did not offer them meat or drink, or 
any tobacco to smoke," by which means the Indians become prejudiced against the Governor, and in the end 
this leads to something serious. You well know that those little civilities shown at times to Indians have had a good 
efl'ect when affairs of consequence are to be settled between the whites and Indians. 

The British Government have brought their method of treating Indians to a perfect system; they have a well- 
regulated Indian department, with a store of goods and a blacksmith at every post for their use. No person is 
eligible for the place of agent unless he can speak some one of the Indian languages. It would be supposed that 
an agent thus appointed is acquainted with their customs and manners, as also with the diflerent chiefs and head- 
men of the different nations of Indians. A British Indian agent will not think it derogatory to his rank to smoke 
and converse with an Indian chief or chiefs; by which means he cannot be imposed upon by designing interpreters, 
as sometimes happens with us. 

It is my decided opinion that our Government ought to establish a distinct department for Indians aflairs in this 
country; a principal agent ought to reside at this place, with subagents at the diflerent posts or garrisons, whose 
duty it should be to report to the principal agent only, and from him to the Government. Agents thus appointed, 
who know their duty, I would venture to saj' Indian aflairs would go on properly. 

A department thus arranged, I would then recommend to treat the Indians well, and give them Indian law; 
to treat them well, I mean that a iew presents be given to them every September, so that they inight commence their 
fall hunt, with a little liquor every spring and autumn for a frolic. The sale of spirituous liquor by traders ought to 
be prohibited, as it is well known that Indians will sell any thing they have for liquor, when intoxicated. Listen to 
their complaints, and render them justice; never promise them more than you mean to perform; allow them a 
free trade to all places; and encourage as many traders as possible to engage in the Indian trade, so that the 
Indians may see that they are dependant on us; and keep them from travelling five or six hundred miles to visit a 
British post, where their minds are poisoned and prepared for any event that may be in agitation. 

To give them Indian law, I would only make this difference: give them so many days to deliver up the trans- 
gressor; and if they failed, then retaliate, and do not allow any traders to go into their country, and there can be no 
doubt but they will ask for peace, and take care that mischief will not again take place; or, if it did, they would not 
hesitate to deliver up the culprit. 

We see iew or no American traders in any part of tlie Indian country; two reasons may be given for this: 1st. 
Indian goods brought on to this country are always sold high, and at a very short credit; by which means those 
who have the means purchase up the goods, and hire those who have not the means to purchase; to barter the 
goods in the Indian country, by which means a cargo of Indian goods that would employ two or three or more 
persons, if the credit were extended, fall into the hands of one purchaser, who employs only one person, or perhaps 
himself, to barter these goods in the Indian country. 2d. It is impossible that any individual can purchase goods 
in this country and sell them as cheap as the factories. British traders onl)' can oppose the factories, from the 
extensive credit they have, and the superior quality of their goods. There can be no other way of bringing the fur 
trade through its proper channels than by underselling the British traders. To shut them out totally would be 
making bad worse, as none of our traders or factors will credit the Indians so extensively as the British traders; 
and it would take such a vast quantity of woollens to supply all the Indians, that it appears that it would be many 
years before every thing could be got in operation to content both parties. Another thing: without you can fully 
supply the Indians with goods for their furs, they would suppose that the shutting out of the British traders was 
intended to injure them, and not the whites. 

Any person conversant in Indian affairs must agree that a department judiciously organized, furnished with 
presents for the Indians as above mentioned, having as an auxiliarj" here merchants who would furnish our traders 
with goods equal in quality and price to those brought from Canada, by which means our citizens would at least 
have a share in the Indian trade, would stop the baneful influence of foreign emissaries in the character of traders. 
A total dependance being on us for their supplies, the Indians would never again attempt to raise the tomahawk 
against the United States. 

I have the honor to be vour excellency's most obedient servant, 

T. FORSYTH. 

His Excellency Governor Clark. — Present. 



Sir: Chickasaw Agency, Octohtr 24, 1815. 

In my attempt to fulfil the expectations of the honorable the Senate of the United States of the 2d of March, 
1815, and your orders of the 17th of August last, I have thought proper to enclose for your information the letter 
and accounts of Mr. Isaac Rawlings, United States factor at the Chickasaw Bluffs, together with the best estimate I 
can make of the transactions that have taken place at the agency and its vicinity for the period embraced in the 
resolution. You will discover that the provision account during my agency far exceeds what was usual to be given; 
this was rendered indispensable, as well from the unusual number of Indians that attended, as for and on account 
of a guard I considered it my duty to select from the most confidential Indians and Indian country men, to guard the 
goods until I could give notice to the nation of the time of delivering. From this guard no other expense is incurred 
to the United States, and I hope you will easily see that the utmost economy was used, when you are informed that 



80 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No. 142. 



2,654 Indians attended to receive the goods; and tiiat, notwitlistanding the best exertions I could possibly make, 
such is their slow and awkward manner of doing business, that it took nie five days to make arrangements and 
complete the service. 1 cannot indulge myself in entertaining a hope that any information I can give, except of a 
local nature, will be useful to you; yet, as you have been pleased to request my opinion, you will not think it 
arrogant in me to give it, that it may receive the corrective hand of those that are better advised; and that, by 
exposing my want of knowledge, I may receive such admonition or advice as will enable me in future to keep 
clear of a repetition of errors. Among the most important objects that have occurred to my mind, and which 
I think should engage the attention of the General Government, as relative to the peace and happiness of this 
nation, is the enacting some prohibitory and penal laws, among which I think some salutary means shoiild be 
provided to prevent the sale and too frequent use of ardent spirits among the Indians; that as frequent outrages are 
committed, as well by imprudent while men travelling through the Indian nation intoxicated, as by drunken Indians 
and others, some attention of the General Government might well be bestowed on that subject. Of the road lead- 
ing from Colbert's ferry to the Natchez, being the way by which many thousands trading to and from New Orleans, 
Mobile, «fcc., will pass and rejiass, and over which the public mail of the United Stales will have to travel, some 
repairs are indispensable through this nation; and I most respectfully suggest that a company of regular soldiers, in 
time of peace, would be well em|)loyed in making improvements on the road, and in removing and keeping 
intruders from off the Indian lands. A difficulty has arisen for which some remedy should be afforded: my prede- 
cessor, in the fall of 1813, ordered several parties of Indians into the service of the United States; his death, I 
presume, has been the cause why no proper representation has ever been made, or any pay given them for such 
service; and although 1 am well assured that the service was faithfully performed, yet there are not such vouchers 
and orders in my possession as to enable n)e to render you a proper account of that service, and the Indians that 
performed that duty are quite uneasy on the subject of their pay. It is my opinion that it would be a great accom- 
modation to the Indians if two or three more blacksmiths were allowed them, and a very considerable part of their 
annuity given in useful articles of husbandry, as many of them seem to incline to become farmers; and surely a 
schoolmaster would have a good effect among them, particularly as the half-breeds are very desirous to educate 
their children. 

Accept assurances of the high respect with which I have the honor to be your obedient servant, 

WILLIAM COCKE, Agent for U. S. to Chkkasaws. 
The Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretarrj of War. 



Report of annuities received and delivered to the Chickasaws for four years antecedent to the 4th of March, 1815. 



Amount from, the 4th March, 1811, to the 3J March, 1812, both inclusive: 
To annuity for 1811. amounting to - . . . . $3,000 00 

To amount of provisions ir.sued to the Indians while receiving their annuity, same year, 

(as par book account,) .-.-.. 200 00 



.\mount from the 4th March, 1812, to the 3d March 1813, both inclusive: 
To annuity for the year 1812, amounting to . . . . 

To amount of provisions issued to the Indians while receiving their annuity, same year, 
(as per book account,) ------ 



3,000 00 
200 00 



Amount from the 4th March, 1813, to the 3d March, 1814, both inclusive: 
To annuity for the year 1813, amounting to - . . . . 

Aniount from the 4th March, 1814, to the 3d March, 1815. both inclusive: 
To annuities for the years 1814 and 1815, amounting (as per invoice) to - - 11,160 15| 

To amount of provisions issued to the Indians while receiving their annuity, and for 

other contingent charges, the same year, - . . - 563 91 



Chinnumbe Mingo, King of the Chickasaws, annuities for the four years antecedent to the 4th March, 
1815, at $100 per annum, (one year's annuity of which is still due him,) - - . 

Total aniount. 



$3,200 00 

3,200 00 
3,000 00 

11,734 06i 

21,124 06 J 

400 00 



$21,524 06 J 



WILLIAM COCKE, Mgentfor the U. S. to the Chickasaws. 



Report of the quarterly expenditures of the Chickasaw agency, from the \st January, 1811, to the ^\st March, 

1815, both inclusive. 



To amount from the 1st January to the 31st March, 1811, both inclusive, - 
To amount from the 1st April to the 30th June, (this year,) both inclusive. 
To amount from the 1st July to the 30th September, (this year,) both inclusive. 
To amount from the 1st October to the 31st December, (this year,) both inclusive,) 

To amount from the 1st January to the 31st March, 1812, both inclusive, - 
To amount from the 1st April to the 30th June, (same year,) both inclusive. 
To amount from the 1st July to the 30lh September, (saine year,) both inclusive, 
To amount from the 1st October to the 31st December, (same year,) both inclusive. 

To amount from the 1st January to the 31st March, 1813, both inclusive, - 
To amount from the 1st April to the 30th June, (same year,) both inclusive. 
To amount from the 1st July to the 30th September, (same year.) both inclusive. 
To amount from the 1st October to the 31st December, (same year,) both inclusive, 



$1,534 42| 

878 62| 

1,442 92| 

1,349 125 



824 


664 


1,923 


12.i 


913 


25 


749 


75 


1,008 


00 


749 


371 


1,371 


3-^ 


1,014 


75 



$5,205 10 



4,410 79 



4,143 50 



1816.] 



TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 



81 



REPORT— Continued. 



To amount from the 1st January to the 31st March, 1814, both inclusive, - 
To amount from the 1st April to the 30th June, (same year,) both inclusive. 
To amount from the 1st July to the 30th September, (same year,) both inclusive. 
To amount from the 1st October to the 31st December, (same year,) both inclusive. 

To amount from the 1st January to the 31st March, 1815, both inclusive, - 

To amount of James Colbert's accounts as United States interpreter to the Chickasaws, 

from the 1st October, 1814, to the 31st March, 1815, both inclusive, (being six 

months,) at $400 per annum, - - . . . 

To boarding the United States blacksmith (and blower and striker) to the Chickasaws, 

for the time above named, at$8 each per month, ... 



$999 75 
894 87i 
483 25 
599 07 


$2,976 94^ 
1,243 68 


- 


- 


200 00 


- 


96 00 


$18,276 OIJ 



WILLIAM COCKE, Mgentfor the U. S. to the Chickasaws. 



Sir: Piqua, September 13, 1815. 

I was duly honored with your letter of the 17th of August, covering a resolution of the Senate of the United 
States, dated March 2, 1815, calling for information in relation to the trade and intercourse with the Indian tribes; 
in answer to which I have the honor to enclose as follows, viz: 

Paper marked A; account of annuities paid the Indians at Fort Wayne and Piqua for the four years antece- 
dent to March 4, 1815. 

Paper marked B, containing an account of presents made to Indians at Fort Wayne and Piqua, under the 
agency of John Johnston, for four years antecedent to March 4, 1815. 

Paper marked C, showing the permanent annuities payable at Fort Wayne and Piqua, viz: Miamies, Eel 
Rivers, Pattawatamies, Shawanees, and Delawares. 

Paper marked D; Indian trade and trading-houses. 

Paper marked E; Indian agencies, &c. 

I have the honor to remain, with very great respect, sir, your most obedient servant, 

JNO. JOHNSTOyi, Indian Agent. 

The Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War, Washington. 



Statement showing the annuities paid by John Johnston, Indian agent at Fort Wayne and at Piqua, in Ohio, 
for the four years preceding the ith March, 1815. 



When paid. 


To whom paid. 


Amount 


1811. 










June 13, 


Paid the Miami chief Little Turtle an annuity or grant made to him 


by the 








President of the United States, ... 


_ 


®150 00 






TVo^c— This chief died in 1812. 








Nov. 18, 


Paid the Shawanees, .... 


. 


1,000 75 




Nov. 20, 


Paid the Miamies, - . . . 


_ 


2,798 89 J 




Nov. 20, 


Paid the Pattawatamies, - - - - 


. 


1,000 54 




Nov. 22, 


Paid the Delawares, .... 


_ 


1,799 24 




Nov. 22, 


Paid the Eel Rivers, .... 


. 


1,100 10 




1812 








$7,849 52i 


Aug. 29, 


Paid the Shawanees, .... 


. 


1,500 00 


Aug. 29, 


Paid the Delawares, ..... 


. 


1,800 00 • 




Sept. 12, 


Paid the Wyandots, in part, - - . 


- 


610 28 


3,910 28 


1813 


Note.— A considerable part of the Wyandots joined the enemy. 






Nov. 22, 


Paid the Shawanees, .... 




1,500 82 




Nov. 6, 


Paid the Delawares, .... 


. 


1,299 92i 




1814. 








2,800 74i 


June 22, 


Paid the Shawanees, .... 


, 


1.500 00 




August — , 


Paid the Delawares, .... 




1,300 00 


2,800 00 
$17,360 55 



The Miamies, Eel Rivers, and Pattawatamies having joined the enemy, their annuities ceased to be paid after 
the year 1811. 

The Delawares and Shawanees remained faithful to the United States, and were paid regularly up to the com- 
mencement of the year 1815. I have no information from the War Department, as yet, of any annuities for them 
the present year. 

The annuities due the before.mentioned tribes have always been punctually paid; and in every instance where 
damage or embezzlement has taken place in the transportation of the articles, the loss has been made good at the 
expense of he United States. 

JNO. JOHNSTON, Indian Agent. 
Piqda, September 6, 1815. 

11 E 



82 



INDIAN AFFAIRS. 



[No 142. 



B. 

An account of presents made to Indians at Fort Wayne and at Piqua, under the agency of John Johnston, for 
four years antecedent to the 4th of March, 1815. 



1812. 
Stplttitbei' 



20, 



July 



From March 4 to December 31, 1811, presents issued to Indians at Fort Wayne 
from the United States tradirig-liouse, - - . . 

From January 1 to August 28, 181'2, presents issued to Indians at Fort Wayne from 
the United States trading-house, .... 

Amount of go(ids issuedto the Indians at a council holden at Piqua, by Governor 
Meigs, the honoiable Thomas Worthington,«iid Jeremiah Morrow, commissioners 
for holding conferences with the northern Indians, 

Clothing and other supplies furnished to Indians at Piqua, in the years 

1812, 1813, and 1814, amounting to - - . $4,233 52 

The whole of the Delawares and Shawanees had claimed and received the protection 
of the United States. They were moved into a compact body on this frontier, 
where they had to be fed and clothed. A number of Mingoes, Senecas, Wyan- 
ddts, some Miamies. and a few Pattawatamies had joined them, including some 
priscmers, which made the whole number about three thousand souls. This amount 
was distributed on them, from lime to time, in clothing and other necessaries. 

Amount of merchandise issued to the Indians at a treaty held at Greenville, July, 
1814, by General Harrison and Governor Cass, commissioners for treating with 
the northern Indians, 



J 1,353 20^ 
1,04S 75 

2,781 46 



4,233 52 



22,185 18 



1,597 llj 



It will be observed that the foregoing presents were chiefly made on account of the United Slates being at war, 
and that, in ordinary times, such disbursements are small. The Indians have no right, by treaty, compact, or 
agreement of any kind, to receive presents from the United States. It appears, however, to have been a custom, 
during every period of the American Government, and, I believe, all other Governments that have preceded it, 
with the Indians. The British load the Indians with presents, and thereby have imposed upon us the necessity of 
following their example, with this difference — that where we give one dollar, they at least give ten. 

JOHN JOHNSTON, Indian Agent. 

Piqua, September 6, 1815. 



C. 

The Miamies, Eel Rivers, Delawares, Pattawatamies, and Shawanees are entitled to receive, by treaty, from 
the United States, in permanent anmdties, as follows, viz: 



The Miamies, ..... 
The Eel Rivers, - - - - . 

That part of the Pattawatamies attached to the Fort Wayne agency. 
The Delawares, ..... 
The Shawanees, under the treaty of Greenville of 1795, 



$2,300 00 
1,100 00 
1,500 00 
1,500 00 
1,000 00 



$7,400 00 



Note. — Under the treaty of Swan creek, or Fort Industry, of July, 1805, the Shawanees are entitled to a pro- 
portion of $1,000 per annum. During the years 1812, 1813, and 1814, I have paid them $500 per annum on 
account of this treaty, the other parties to it having joined the enemy. On account of the faithful adherence of the 
Shawanees to the United States during the late war, the Government should make this sum permanent to them, 
which would settle their annuity at $1,500 per annum. 

JOHN JOHNSTON, Indian Agent. 
Piqua, September 6, 1815. 

D. 



TRADE WITH THE INDIANS. 

Piqua, September 6, 1815, 

1 have not materials for making out an account of the Indian trade, most of my papers having been lost or de- 
stroyed by the murder of my brother, and the burning of the public trading-house and establishment at Fort Wayne, 
in 1812; but there are ample materials for the purpose in the office of the superintendent of Indian trade. It may 
not be improper, however, to observe, that of all the trading-houses owned by the United States at the commence- 
ment of the late war, the one at Fort Wayne, of which I had the direction, yielded the most profit — about $10,000 
was the clear gain; it commenced in 1802, and was destroyed in September, 1812. 

The trading-houses with the northern Indians never produced any political effect in our favor among them, but 
iho contrary. The Indians were led to believe that the object was to make money; and inasmuch as the goods were 
never sold cheaper than those of the common traders, it was impossible to produce a contrary impression. Those sold 
at the public stores were generally of an inferior quality and fashion. I do not mean by this that the superintend- 
ent furnished bad goods; he procured the best that the market would afford; but such goods as are calculated for the 
Indian trade are rarely imported into the United States, there being no regular demand for them. The British 
merchants in Canada have persons in England long used to this commerce, who send out the very articles wanted, 
and who never send an)' that are unsaleable. Under the superintendence of General Mason, the trading establish- 
ments have been as well conducted as any institutions of the kind could be, taking into view the ditiiculty of procuring 
regular assortments; but it is believed, for obvious reasons, that nothing of the kind carried on, on Government ac- 
count, can be made to stand a successful competition with merchants, stimulated by private interest, so long estab- 
iislied as those in Canada, and fortified and protected by all the power and patronage of the King's Government. 



1816.] TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 83 

The supplies for the public trading-houses passing necessarily through many liands, great delays take place in 
the transportation, often arriving out of season, sometimes damaged, and sometimes embezzled. The furs and pel- 
tries, taking the same course to reach the market, often share the same fate; in one instance, I lost in Lake Erie 
$2,300 worth of furs and peltry through the carelessness of a drunken non-commissioned officer who had the com- 
mand of the boats. The military have always been unfriendly to the trading-houses, and have invariably obstructed 
their successful operation. I know of no reason for this, except that they are instructed to furnish transportation, 
erect buildings, &c.; and this, not being connected with military operations, they do not consider as a part of their 
duty. 

I have long been of the opinion that, so far as concerns the northern Indians, the Government should leave the 
trade open to individual enterprise, and that they should by all means encourage their own citizens to embark in it, 
to exclude as far as possible, within their own limits, the subjects of Great Britain from any participation therein. 
Every British trader among the Indians is a political partisan, sowing the seeds of distrust and dislike against the 
Government and people of the United States. It was through this description of persons that all the plans of the 
late Indian war were laid, matured, and brought into operation. 

Associations of individuals, formed into a trading company on the plan of the British Northwest Company, would 
be more likely to insure a participation in the Indian trade than persons acting singly for themselves. In the com- 
mencement of the undertaking, losses might be expected; and this could be better met by a company. There can 
be no question but the trade, in the end, would be profitable. Immense fortunes have been made by it in Canada; and 
although it is not now so profitable as formerly, it would still be an object worthy the attention of the American 
merchant. It must be a cause of regret with all, that the subjects of a foreign nation should continue to monopolize 
a lucrative trade within the territories of the United States, and that, too, without the Governinent deriving any 
revenue from it; for it is notorious that the greater part of the goods taken into the Indian country by British 
traders are smuggled. The avowed object in retaining possession of Mackinac so long was to afford an opportu- 
nity this season of passing an immense quantity of Indian goods upwards, as well for trade as to supply the Indians 
on the Upper Mississippi with the means of carrying on the war against the whites. The refusal of the Indians to 
treat shows plainly the agency of the ever-active vindictive enemy of these States. 

I have no hesitation in declaring that the views of the Government will be better promoted, in relation to the 
n)anagement of the northern Indians, by leaving the trade open to the enterprise of American citizens, and that 
such laws and regulations may be enacted as will encourage and protect them, to the exclusion of foreigners, in the 
prosecution of it. 

Should Government, however, determine on renewing the trading-houses, I am decidedly of the opinion that a 
person actually experienced in the Indian trade should be kept in England, as an agent, for the purpose of selecting 
and procuring supplies for the trade and the annuities. 

All which I have the honor to submit to the honorable the Secretary of War. 

JOHN JOHNSTON, Indian Agent. 



INDIAN AGENCIES, &c. 

PiQUA, September 6, 1815. 

No inconvenience or injury that I know of has ever arisen to the public service in consequence of the Secretary 
of War having the management of Indian aftairs, nor do I know what necessity there is for placing the direction and 
superintendence thereof in a separate department. But there is much room for reform in the details of the plan 
fordoing business with the Indians; the present mode is expensive, and experience has shown is productive of very 
little service: if proper attention had been bestowed on this subject, it is more than probable hostilities with the na- 
tives might have been avoided. In order to watch the Indians, and the traders who infest their country, the public 
agents should be multiplied among them; every tribe should have an agent who should be compelled to reside with 
them, or so near as to be able to have an eye to them at all times, and should be held accountable for the peaceable 
conduct of the Indians committed to his charge, or at least so far as to detect and make known any mischievous 
designs which they may have formed, in time that the execution thereof might be prevented; and this it is conceived 
would be in the power of any agent who paid attention to his duty. Agents might as well, for any good they do to 
the public service, reside at Washington City, as at Detroit, St. Louis, Kaskaskia, or Vincennes. 

Each tribe having an agent, a certain number of agencies should be committed to the superintendence of one 
person — either the Territorial Governors, or any other the President might appoint. There are some objections to 
the Governors of Territores being ex officio superintendents of Indian affairs; some of them think the subject be- 
neath their notice, and pay little or no attention to it; some are, of course, whatever their other qualities may be, 
not calculated for the purpose; the business is left to others, and in this way the service suffers. Where the Gov- 
ernors will bestow proper attention on the subject, they should be preferred, because their residence necessarily 
being near the Indian country, conmiunications can be frequent between them and the agents. A capable, upright 
man, who would beget the confidence of the Indians, by application, integrity, and a scrupulous regard for truth, 
should be preferred to all others. Under the present plan, there is a horde of |)ersons called interpreters and sub- 
agents in employ, who do no good, for they are generally permitted to reside at the seats of the Territorial Govern- 
ments, where there is little or no occasion for them; it is among the Indians that such persons, to do service, must 
be stationed. Should an agent be appointed to each tribe, he would want but one interpreter, of course. It may be 
alleged that agents, to reside with the Indians, would be exposed to much personal danger. I do not believe this 
would be the case. The chiefs of the Indians would feel a pride in having the representative of the Government 
among them, and would, after a proper acquaintance, afford him all the aid and protection in their power; but if the 
Indian country be garrisoned, in most of cases it would suit the agents to reside near some fort. In the present un- 
settled state of the Indians, peace cannot be preserved, and the public authority maintained, without a respectable 
military force judiciously posted near their most populous settlements. There is nothing that the Indians so nmch 
dread as having garrisons in their country; and inasmuch as the means of influencing them still remain with the 
British, and, by the by, in a greater degree than ever, in consequence of their making common cause in the late war, 
it behooves the United States now to take effectual measures against any future rising of the Indians, and it is con- 
ceived this can only be done by garrisoning their country, and placing watchful sentinels over them in the character 
of agents. The places to be garrisoned I conceive to be Chicago; the old Peoria towns, on the Illinois river; Green 
Bay, somewhere near the mouth of Fox river; at the old Wea towns, on the Wabash river; Fort Harrison and 
Fort Wayne to be kept up; suitable positions on the Mississippi and Missouri to be garrisoned; some intermediate 
points between the Mississippi and Lake Michigan to be occupied and garrisoned; also, after these forts are com- 
pleted, one hundred men at each will be sufficient; at some of them fifty would answer. To man the whole of the 
new garrisons that may be necessary among the northern Indians, one tliousand men will be amply sufficient. The 



84 INDIANAFfAIRS. [No. 142. 

expense of supporting such a force is not to be placed in competition with tlie chances of an Indian war, which 
would be at least ten to one against us, in leaving the Indian country as it now is. In reviewing this subject, it may 
be profitable to recur to the period of the commencement of the late war, when the Indian country, in the almost 
total absence of the United States authorities, fell an easy prey into the hands of the enemy. Forts, situated in 
places not accessible to vessels that navigate the lakes, should be provisioned for a year. 

The supplies of goods and other necessaries for the Indians should be forwarded to the agent of each tribe, so 
that they might roach him by the beginning of September, in every year. This is a short time before the Indians 
commence their hunting excursions for the winter; should they arrive much later, they could not receive them before 
the ensuing year. It is of much consequence the keeping of large numbers of Indians from being collected together; 
the breaking them up into separate agencies will have this effect; when a number of tribes get together, they become 
too sensible of their own strength and importance. The northern Indians scarcely ever meet in large numbers 
-without plotting mischief against us. 

There have been too many treaties made with the northern Indians; and when they have been broken on their 
part, no punishment has followed; this I take to be the grand cause of their ^reseji/ hostile temper. I have always 
thought it a questionable policy to press the Indians for such repeated cessions of their country; it has soured their 
minds against us, and has furnished the British with the best arguments in seducing the Indians from their duty and 
allegiance to the United States. In many instances, purchases have been made of their lands in places not required 
by the wants of our population. At a treaty held at Fort Wayne, in 1809, a large tract of land was procured on 
the Wabash, and a small strip fifteen miles wide on the west side of the old boundary, extending to Fort Recovery. 
The Indians, on the first application, consented to let us have the fifteen miles wide, because, they said, our people 
were crowded, and wanted more room; but they could not see what we wanted with the tract on the Wabash, where 
we had no people to occupy it, unless it were to get rid of the Indians who lived on it. These were the remarks of 
the Miami chief, (the Little Turtle,) made to myself. 

The Government may rest assured that the whole of the Indian lands will fall into our hands soon enough to 
answer the demands of our surplus population; for when the land becomes useless to them, as no longer affording 
game for their subsistence, they will offer it for sale to the United States, and move back; and, seeing that all former 
experience proves this fact, I can see no use in distressing the natives, and making our Government and people 
odious to them, by pressing them for premature sales of their country. In another point of view, it is conceived to 
be a doubtful policy having several districts of country bordering on the Indians for sale at the same time; the con- 
sequence is, that the settlements become scattered and irregular, generally following the watercourses, thereby pre- 
senting innumerable fronts, and, in the event of war, subjecting the Government to incalculable expense in protecting 
them; indeed, no force can be adequate to such a purpose. On the contrary, if the settlements be made compact, 
they will contain within themselves a force sufficient for all the purposes of defence against savages. 

Each Indian agency should be furnished with several national flags handsomely ornamented. 

All which is respectfully submitted to the honorable the Secretary of War. 

JOHN JOHNSTON, Indian Agent. 

Sir: Indian Agency Office, Fort Wayne, October 1, 1815. 

I have been just honored, by your letter of the 17th of August, with several copies of the resolution of the 
Senate of the 2d of March, and requiring of me statements and observations relating to the Indian department; and 
1 hasten to lay before you the information required. 

The Delawares, Pattawatamies, and Miamies have been considered as the proper charge of this agency. But 
temporarily, the Wyandots, with some Senecas, Kanzas, Delawares, and Shawanees, who reside with the Wyandots, 
•were put under my charge during the war, and still remain so. The annuities of those tribes are: to the Wyandots, 
by the treaty of Greenville of 1795, $1,000 in goods; by the treaty of Detroit, $400 in cash; to the Wyandots, 
and those Indians who reside with the Wyandots, by virtue of the treaty of Swan creek, $1,000 in cash; the whole 
annuity to the Delawares is $1,800 in goods; the Pattawatamies; receive from this agency $1,000 in goods, (their 
■whole annuity is $2,400.;) the Miamies, $2,300; and the Eel Rivers, $1,100 in goods. There was an annuity 
of $500 to the Miamies and Eel Rivers, that ceased to be payable after the year 1813. 

I was not in office in 1811; nor is there any record left in this office that will show the precise time of the de- 
livery of the annuities for that year. But 1 can state that all the Indians under my charge acknowledged the receipt of 
their respective annuities for the year 1811. For 1812, there were forwarded, in goods, for the Delawares, $1,800; 
Eel Rivers, $1,100; Miamies, $2,800; Pattawatamies, $1,000. 

All the goods for the Detroit agency were forwarded to Cincinnati, and there lodged subject to my order. I 
ordered them to be delivered to the care of John Johnston, Indian agent, to be transported to Piqua, there to wait 
my further orders; the disposition of the Indians at that moment appearing doubtful. In the mean time, a genera! 
council had been directed at Piqua, and special commissioners appointed. All doubts having been removed with 
respect to the hostility of a great part of those Indians, and no security for the friendship of any, the commissioners 
advised Mr. Johnston to have the remaining goods (a small part of which had been given out at the council) trans- 
ported back to Dayton, as a place of greater security. There they remained in charge of Mr. Johnston, and he 
, informed me that he had reported the same to the War Department. I can, however, state, from undoubted au- 
thority, that a detachment of militia of Kentucky, in marching through Dayton to the relief of this fort when besieged, 
opened the stores containing the Indian goods, and took such articles as they chose, without rendering any account; 
the exact amount I cannot determine. Mr. Johnston has, no doubt, rendered an account. 

From illness, I was not able to attend the general council at Piqua, and Mr. Johnston delivered out of the goods 
above mentioned the annuity to the Delawares and Shawanees, and $610 in goods to the Wyandots. 

When, from the hostile appearance of the Indians in the neighborhood of this post, in August, 1812, it was 
thought advisable by the clerk of the store of goods for Indian trade to move the goods into the fort, all were 
moved in except a few heavy articles, such as iron and steel, in bars, and some other iron articles, and the skins 
that had been taken of the Indians in barter: the amount of the skins I am not able to determine — I should think 
about $4,000. The clerk of the store being killed by the Indians, and the factor (John Johnston) being at his resi- 
dence at Piqua, I took charge of the goods. General Harrison, arriving with an army to the relief of this post, 
ordered me, as Governor of the Indiana Territory, to deliver over to the commanding officers of regiments all such 
goods as were suited to the necessities of the army; which was done, and an account rendered to John Johnston, 
factor. 

During the siege of this place, all the buildings belonging to the Indian department and the department of In- 
dian trade were necessarily burnt for the safety of the fort. There are no records left in this office of the expense 
of those buildings, nor to which department the expense was charged; but I should think it would be about 
$2,000. 



1816.] TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 85 

About the close of 1812, by order of General Harrison, I removed my office to Upper Sandusky; and, in 1813, 
I accompanied the army under his command into Upper Canada, in command of the Indians, and by his order acted 
temporarily as agent at Detroit. During tliis year I made considerable expenditures for provisions for the Indian 
department, and to a small amount in presents in fitting out the Indian warriors, and some few other presents: an 
exact account of all which has been rendered to the War Department. 

In July, 1814, a treaty with those tribes was ordered to be held at Greenville, and $20,000 worth of goods 
was ordered to be provided for that purpose. John Johnston was ordered to take an inventory of the goods above- 
mentioned remaining on hand at this post and at Dayton, and purchase at Cincinnati a sufficient quantity to make 
up that amount; and I believe about $24,000 amount was furnished Mr. Johnston, who will render the account 
of the amount purchased and on hand. We acted jointly at that treaty in the management of the pecuniary aflairs, 
under the general direction of the commissioners; but the accounts remain with Mr. Johnston, who will transmit 
them to the War Department. Out of those goods the Delawares were paid all the annuity which was due to them 
up to that date. Tlie Wyandots received ,$390, the balance due to them in goods of their annuity of 1812, and 
the goods, part of their annuity for 1813 and 1814. I ofl'ered them goods in lieu of the cash, but they refused to 
receive them, (those nations being considered as not having forfeited their claims to their annuities.) There was, 
therefore, remaining due to the Wyandots, and those Indians residing with the Wyandots at that time, $4,200 in 
cash, which was reported to the War Department by the commissioners. From the pressing urgency of the In- 
dians, and the manifest public injury from longer delay of payment, I drew on the Secretary of War the 6th Febru- 
ary, 1815, for that amount, and have received no advice whether honored or not. 

In February last, I purchased in Cincinnati goods to the amount of $1,398 63f, which have been given in very 
small presents to Indians, in the ordinary cases of the Indian department as they have daily occurred from that 
time to this, with a small remainder of $50 value. 

It appears from the foregoing history of the pecuniary transactions of the Indian department, so far as my 
knowledge extends, that there fell due to the Indians at present under charge of this agency, and who adhered to 
the United States during the four years immediately preceding the 2d of March, 1815— 

To the Wyandots, in goods, - - - - $4,000 

To the Wyandots, in cash, ... - 1,600 

To the Wyandots, and those Indians who live with them, in cash, - 4,000 



$9,600 
Delawares, ..--.- 7,600 



17,200 



To those tribes who were hostile, and embraced by the treaty of Greenville, of 1815 — 
Pattawatamies, ----- $4,000 

Miamies, - - - - - 10,000 

Eel Rivers, . , - . - 4,400 

Miamies and Eel Rivers, for 1812 and 1813, - - 1,000 

19,400 

$36,600 

If this latter sum of $19,400 to the Pattawatamies, Miamies, and Eel Rivers is considered as forfeited by their 
hostility, (except the annuity paid in 1811,) there remains due only for the four years — 

To the Wyandots, and those who reside with the Wyandots, $4,200. 

The whole amount of presents does not appear from the above account, because many presents were given by 
military officers out of supplies intended for the military department, and, in some few cases, reported to the 
agents. But I believe the whole amount (exclusive of the treatv of Greenville and provisions) has been about 
$4,300. 

The amount of provisions given is still more difficult to determine, for the same reason; yet I think it may be 
estimated to have amounted in the four vears, within the limits where at different times I have had charge, to about 
$230,000. 

With respect to the question presented in the last paragraph of the resolution of the Senate, I must observe 
that I have during the late war had some opportunities of observing the difference in the organization between the 
British Indian department of the Canadas and that of the United States, and am clearly of the opinion that the British 
organization is, in several particulars, superior to that of the United States. The British give to all the officers of 
their Indian department a military brevet rank, and cause them to wear military insignia. And they give employ- 
ment to every white man whom they believe to have any influence among Indians; and if he renders no service, 
they say it is worth more than he costs to keep him from doing them an injury; that the Government has no other 
concern in Indian trade than to regulate it. 

The relative rank their officers acquire with their military rank has many very evident advantages, particu- 
larly in accelerating and rendering uniform all their measures; and the military rank adds greatly to iheir import- 
ance in the view of the Indians. It obviates, in some measure, what the United States have experienced much 
embarrassment from, viz: the powers of an Indian agent in the neighborhood of a military post, in relation to the 
officer commanding not being clearly defined. It has been my belief that there would be an advantage resulting 
from all Indian agents having military powers similar to the Governors of Territories, but of subordinate rank. 

The experience of the late war has shown that we cannot have a British war without a war with the Indians, 
and that the only means of preventing their joining the enemy is, to give them immediate employment with our 
armies. In this case, it would be highly important that the officers of the Indian department who are individually 
acquainted with the Indians under their charge, respectively, should conduct them in the field. If so, military rank 
would be almost indispensable to the officers of the Indian department. 

I have been fully satisfied that the advantages contemplated, resulting from the Indian trade carried on by the 
Government, have not been realized; that the Indians of the northwest have an aversion to it, from a belief that it 
is not carried on for their benefit, but as a matter of speculation. The enemies of the United States have per- 
suaded many Indians to believe that it was a scheme of the United States to permit them to take the goods on 
credit until they should not be able to make payment, and then take their lands from them to satisfy the debt. 

I believe that the Indian trade may be put under such restraints by the Government, in the hands of companies 
or individuals, that it may be managed with as much regularity as in the hands of the Government. I am of the 
opinion that the oath of allegiance should be required of all Indian traders, and that the moral character and 
characteristic attachment to the United States should be a matter of considefration; that there should be a power 
vested in the agents of the United States to inspect the trade and punish frauds. 



86 INDIANAFFAIRS. [No. 142. 

I have no doubt that during the late war the affairs of the Indian department have languished for want of the 
necessary attention of the head of tlie War Department, (which no doubt was unavoidable.) And if putting the 
Indian department under a separate head can be considered consistent wiih its receiving military, added to its 
civil powers, I should be clearly of the opinion that it should bo a separate department. In a state of peace, tlie 
present organization might answer every purpose. But to be prepared for a slate of war must be our highest 
interest; and the present powers and organization appear not to be sufficiently efficient for that state. 

It lias been tiie result of my observation that the attempt to civilize Indians, while they have a widely e.xtended 
forest 10 ramble in, will prove abortive; but that their ferocity may be neutralized by supplying their wants, and 
they attached to ihe source from whence they receive this supply; that the British have gained great advantages 
over us by their great liberality to the Indians; and that it has cost the United States more treasure in the late war 
(exclusive of blood) in opposing Indians purchased by British liberality, than would secure tliera to the United 
States for thirty years. I think we should increase our liberality to a degree at least equal to that of the British, 
or not give them any thing. What we give and pay them, when compared with the presents they receive from the 
British, appears so trifling, that to withhold all presents would not have much, if any, more injurious efi'ect than 
giving them so much less; that it is much cheaper reducing them by meat and bread than by the force of arms; 
and, from the observations I have had the opportunity of making, that three or four months' full feeding on meat 
and bread, even without ardent spirit, will bring on disease, and, in six or eight months, great mortality. And 
would it be considered a proper mode of warfare? I believe more Indians might be killed with the expense of 
$100,000 in this way, than $1,000,000 expended in the support of armies to go against them. 
I have the honor to be, sir, your very obedient servant, 

B. F. STICKNEY, Indian Agent. 

Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



Sir: Cherokee Agency, November 30, 1815. 

I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 17th August last, accompanied by a resolution of the 
Senate of the 2d March last, requiring a report on the several questioHs therein stated. I proceed to report first — 
Of Annuities. — It is understood that annuities become due in this agency at the commencement of each year, but 
are not expected to be received by the Indians initil the Government shall direct the payment. 
On the ]-3th of July, 1812, I paid the Cherokee annuity for that year, and transmitted a receipt 

therefor, ..-..-. $9,000 00 

Oil the 1st of November instant, I paid the Cherokee annuities for the years 1813, 1814, 1815, 

1816, and a balance over that will apply in part payment of their annuity for the year 1817; 

the amount of the four years' annuity, at $9,000 per year, . . - 36,000 00 

The balance over, to be deducted from their annuity for the year 1817, is - - 3,744 33.V 



Total amount of annuities paid in this agency within the times specified in the resolution of the 

Senate, - ' - - - - - - $48,7 44 33^ 

Presents. — Presents, within the periods required by the resolution of the Senate, made to 
the Cheiokees for the promotion of agriculture and domestic manufactures, in prosecution of the 
plan of Government to lead them from a state of hunters to that of herdsmen and cultivators, and 
a knowledge of the useful arts, amount to - - - - - $8,445 80 

Presents to Cherokee officers of distinguished merit, who served under the command of General 

A. Jackson, in the Creek war, . . . - - 956 29i 



Total amount of presents to the Cherokees within the times specified in the resolution of the 

Senate, --...-- $9,402 09j 

I now proceed to make such observations on the several parts of the last paragraph of the resolution of the Sen- 
ate as may appear to me to be just. The first question is, " Whether any alteration of the powers and duties of 
the several officers and agents employed in the superintendence and management of Indian aflairs would be ad- 
vantageous?" On this question, I beg leave to observe that, if the Indian trade, as hitherto carried on, shall no! 
have supported ihe appropriations that have been made for that department, it would seem that a remedy should 
be applied — that is, to empower the principal officer of the Indian department (if not already authorized) to direct 
the several factors in his department to put such advance on the merchandise for that trade as, after a careful esti- 
mation of all the expenses, would secure the United States from loss, and moderately increase the capital. This ought 
to bo done to guard against adventitious circumstances, which may be expected to happen, particularly from thv 
double transportation of the merchandise and the articles received in payment at the trading-houses. A good mer- 
cantile advance being jiut on the goods will not frustrate the benevolent design of the first institution of that trade; 
for the Indians will still be furnished with goods at the factories from fifty to one hundred and fifty |>er centum 
cheaper than they now pay to itinerant and straggling traders, who, under licenses, traverse the whole Indian coun- 
tries within ihe United States; they meet the Indians at their hunting camps, and purchase the finest articles from them; 
so that the articles brought to the public stores are often of an inferior quality. This is an additional reason why ii 
reasonable mercantile advance should be put on the merchandise at the public stores. It is my opinion, from four- 
teen years' observation here, that there is no benevolence in selling any thing to the Indians at such reduced prices 
as thereby to reduce the capital; it has the effiict to lessen his industry; it cherishes his strongest passion — the love 
of ease; he rarely exerts his powers but from necessity. 

The next part of the last paragraph of the resolution of the Senate is, " Whether the consolidation of the 
whole care and management thereof, and the placing the same in a single department, would be expedient?" To 
this question I answer in the affirmative. I have a long time been of this opinion, and have frequently expressed 
it. I will endeavor to give some reasons for that opinion; and here I must be indulged with a long detail of some 
very perplexing business which, through the Indian agencies, at present appertains lo the War Department. All 
the burglaries, thefts, stealing horses and other property, some robberies, personal abuses, and injuries of almost 
every description on the frontiers — all these are as common to one party as the other, and are brought to the ageni 
as complaints demanding redress; these complaints are in general badly stated, having no legal testimony to sub- 
stantiate them. On the part of the Indians, they are still more defective for want of testimony, because, by our 
institutions, they are prohibited the privilege of making oath. There are hundreds of these casus, and many of 
them are undoubtedly just, that cannot be supported by legal evidence. They are taken up by the agent and de- 



1816.] TRADE AND INTERCOURSE. 87 

cided on by self-created extra-judicial procedure. Tlie agent calls to liis aid one or two judicious men. We then 
style ourselves a board. We take up each case, examine the documents, (where there are an}' adduced,) and liear 
verbal testimony — altogether so on the part of the Indians; their simple narration nmst be attended lo. After 
which the board gives an opinion on each case; they are then transmitted by the agent with the documents, with our 
remarks, to the Secretary of War, where they are re-examined, and returned to the agent confirmed or negatived by 
the Secretary. The successful claimant is paid his damages recovered; as to the other, there is an end of the 
process. 

This extra-judicial procedure is believed to be the only mode that can be adopted at present to do justice to 
these complaints, for scarcely any one of these cases could be sustained in a court of law. 

Some of these cases require as much time for investigation as a trial in a court of law; and though the amount 
of damages is generally of inconsiderable value, \'et they are of moment to the poor claimants, and must be 
adjusted in some way to prevent the parties from making reprisals which would lead to hostilities. 

I have by this detail endeavored to show the extent of this perplexing business appertaining to the duties of the 
War Department under the present arrangement. It is my opinion that all the business of Indian trade, and the busi- 
ness of the Indian agencies, particularly such as I have just stated, ought to be transacted in another department — I 
mean an Indian department. It appears to me that there should be no law litigation, no chancery jurisdiction, and no 
counting-house rooms in the War Office. The mind of the War Department should be exclusively occupied about 
war and preparation for war; if in case of war there should be Indian corps organized, they, of course, become a part 
of the army, and will not while in service be coiTsidered as belonging to the Indian departn)ent, but under the War 
Department. Every thing extraneous to this highly responsible department it appears to me should be removed. 
We talk about peace: let us make the best use of it; from my observation, the eyes of the community continue 
to be yet fixed on the War and Navy Departments. 

The question in the last part of the resolution of the Senate is, " Whether a plan may not be devised that will 
be equally advantageous to the Indian tribes, and more economical to the public, whereby the Indian trade may, 
under safeguards, be hereafter carried on by individuals or by private companies, instead of the manner in which 
the same is now conductedl" On this part of the resolution of the Senate I beg leave to observe that I cannot 
conceive it practicable, by any guards in the power of Government, to restrain individuals or private trading com- 
panies from taking advantages of the Indians, and such a measure might be viewed by the Indians as a relinquish- 
ment of the original plan of the institution of that trade. It appears to me that by factors under the control of 
Government the trade may be carried on without loss to the United States. I have always understood that benevo- 
lence and policy were combined in the plan of this trade, and it is undoubtedly true that the Indians consider the 
public trading-houses as their fathers' houses; they are rallying points where the Indians feel at home; they feel the 
paternal care of the Government; it strengthens their attachment and fidelity. 

I can make no other report on the subject of Indian trade on public account than that it was discontinued here 
in 1811. 

In your letter you gave me a latitude in making observations, which I must plead as an apology for the length 
of my letter. , 

I have the honor to be, with great respect, your obedient servant, 

RETURN J. MEIGS. 

Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



Sir: Choctaw Agency, October 25, 1815. 

I have had the honor to receive your letter of the 17th August last, enclosing a resolution of the Senate of 
the United States. 

The short time I have been agent, and the little of that time I had to spare from more pressing duties arising 
from the late war, have not afforded me leisure or opportunity to be well informed on the subjects embraced in the 
resolution. I requested my predecessor, iVlr. Dinsmoor, to favor me with the result of his observations and expe- 
rience; a copy of his note I have the honor to enclose. With a vigorous mind and solid judgment, I know no person 
in the Indian department that has done so much towards civilizing the Indians, and I feel confident his informatioa 
and suggestions will have due weight. 

During my agency I have delivered to the Choctaws $4,831 88 in goods, part of their annuity for the year 
1813, leaving a balance, by report from the Indian office, December 15, 1813, of $1,028 12, and there is now in 
store here $5,851 for the annuity of 1814. 

I am informed by Mr. Hawkinson's agent at Natchez that a quantity of goods has been received by him subject 
to my order, (by the invoice accompanying them, $19,001 13:J,) but I have not yet received the invoice, or any 
official information to govern me in their distribution. I understand the invoice and instructions are at Natchez. 
I have prepared the Indians to receive, in advance, for their annuity, such part as may have been directed by General 
Jackson for that purpose, and I expect to have them brought up and distributed in all this month. 
I have the honor to be, with very great respect, sir, your obedient servant, 

JOHN McKEE. 

The Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War, 

The agent has the disposal of the following articles, cash and merchandise, for the Choctaws, viz: 
Sundry goods, the balance undamaged, of an invoice forwarded by General Jackson, $18,783 88J 
Annuity for 1814, including raingoes' salary and stand rent, - - 5,851 00 

Balance in cash due the chiefs and nation for the year 1813, - - 1,028 12 

$25,663 OOJ 



The agent delivers the annuity for 1814, as per invoice, - - - $5,851 00 
The balance in cash for the annuity of 1813 he delivers to the three great medal 

chiefs, for their salary for the years 1813, 1815, and part of 1816, - 1,028 12 

He will deliver to the mingoes, as the balance of their salary for 1816, - 321 88 

He will deliver to the mingoes, in goods, their salary for 1817, - - 450 00 

He will deliver annuities, including stand rent, for 1815, 1816, and 1817, - 16,200 00 

He will deliver as presents to the mingoes, leaders, and distinguished warriors, - 1,812 OOJ 



25,663 00* 



88 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 143. 

Choctaw Agency, December 29, 18] 5. 
I certify that in November last, at the request of Colonel John McKee, United States agent to the Choctaw 
nation of Indians, I inspected sundry packages of merchandise received for the nation, found some of the bales 
entirely broken up, the goods much damaged, some of the cloths absolutely rotten, and most of them injured except 
some packed in sound tierces. 

SILAS DINSMOOR. 



Sir: Department of War, August 17, 1815. 

The enclosed resolution of the Senate clearly defines the nature of the information which you are requested 
to give this Department relative to the amount of annuities and presents due, paid, and delivered to the several 
Indian tribes within your agency, during the four years immediately preceding the 4th of March, 1815. 

In directing your attention particularly to the clause respecting annuities and presents, it is not intended to con- 
fine your communications to those points. In the discharge of your official duties, j'ou have no doubt acquired an 
intimate knowledge of the general nature of the subject embraced in the resolution. Your views and observations 
upon the several questions presented in the last paragraph will be received with great pleasure, and will meet with 
all the consideration which the importance of the subject requires. 

My recent assumption of the duties of this Department, and the near approach of the period when the duty 
required by the resolution must be performed, make it necessary that the information which it is in your power to 
give should be transmitted with the least possible delay. 

With great respect, I have the honor to be your most obedient servant, 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

[Addressed to the Governors of the Mississippi, Indiana, Michigan, Illinois, and Missouri Territories; William Cocke, Chickasaw 
Agent; Erasfus Granger, Indian Agent, Buffalo; Major Samuel Lovely, Indian Agent, Arkansas; John Johnston, Indian 
Agent, Piqua; Benjamin F. Stickney, Agent, Fort Wayne; Colonel R. J. Meigs, Cherokee Agent; Thomas Gales, Indian 
Agent, Natchitoches; John McKee, Choctavc Agent; Colonel Benjamin Hawkins, Creek Agent.] 



14th Congress.] No. 143. [1st Session. 

TREATY AND CONVENTION WITH THE CHEROKEE S. 

COMMUNICATED TO THE SENATE, MARCH 28, 1816. 

To the Senate of the United States: March 26, 1816. 

I lay before the Senate, for their advice as to a ratification, articles of a treaty and of a convention which have 
been concluded with the Cherokee nation, with documents relating to the losses by the Indians, for which indemnity 
is stipulated. 

JAMES MADISON. 



Articles of a treaty made and concluded at the city of Washington, on the twenty-second day of March, one thou- 
sand eight hundred and sixteen, between George Graham, being specially authorized by the President of the 
United States thereto, and the undersigned chiefs and headmen of the Cherokee nation, duly authorized and 
empowered by the said nation. 

Article 1. Whereas the Executive of the State of South Carolina has made an application to the President of 
the United States to extinguish the claim of the Cherokee nation to that part of their lands which lie within the bound- 
aries of the said State, as lately established and agreed upon between that State and the State of North Carolina; 
and as the Cherokee nation is disposed to comply with the wishes of their brothers of South Carolina, they have 
agreed, and do hereby agree, to cede to the State of South Carolina, and forever quit claim to, the tract of country 
contained within the following bounds, viz: beginning on the east bank of the Chattuga river, where the boundary 
line of the Cherokee nation crosses the same; running thence with the said boundary line to a rock on the Blue 
Ridge, where the boundary line crosses the same, and which rock has been lately established as a corner to the 
States of North and South Carolina; running thence, south, sixty-eight and a quarter degrees west, twenty miles 
and thirty-two chains, to a rock on the Chattuga river, at the thirty-fifth degree of north latitude, another corner of 
the boundaries agreed upon by the States of North and South Carolina; thence, down and with the Chattuga, to the 
beginning. 

Art. 2. For and in consideration of the above cession, the United States promise and engage that the State of 
South Carolina shall pay to the Cherokee nation, or its accredited agent, the sum of five thousand dollars, within 
ninety days after the President and Senate shall have ratified this treaty: Provided, That the Cherokee nation shall 
have sanctioned the same in council: And provided, also. That the Executive of the State of South Carolina shall 
approve of the stipulations contained in this article. 

In testimony whereof, the said commissioner, and the undersigned chiefs and headmen of the Cherokee na- 
tion, have hereunto set their hands and seals. 

GEORGE GRAHAM. 
[Signed also by the chiefs and headmen of the Cherokee nation.] 



1816.] TREATY AND CONVENTION WITH THE CHEROKEE S. 89 

Artiphsofa convention made and entered into between George Graltam, specially authorized thereto hy the Pres- 
ident of the United States, and the undersigned chiefs and headmen of the Cherokee nation, duly authorized 
and empowered by the said nation. 

Article 1. Whereas doubts have existed in relation to the northern boundary of that part of the Creek lands 
lying west of the Coosa river, and which were ceded to the United States by the treaty held at Fort Jackson, on 
the ninth day of August, one thousand eight hundred and fourteen: and whereas, by the third article of the treaty, 
dated the seventh of January, one thousand eight hundred and six, between the United States and the Cherokee na- 
tion, the United States have recognised a claim on the part of the Cherokee nation to the lands south of the Big 
Bend of the Tennessee river, and extending as far west as a place on the waters of Bear creek, [a branch of the 
Tennessee river,] known by the name of the Flat Rock or Stone; it is, therefore, now declared and agreed that 
a line shall be run from a point on the west bank of the Coosa river, opposite to the lower end of the Ten Islands 
in said river, and above Fort Strother, directly to the Flat Rock or Stone on Bear creek, [a branch of the Ten- 
nessee river;] which line shall be established as the boundary of the lands ceded by the Creek nation to the United 
Slates by the treaty held at Fort Jackson, on the ninth day of August, one thousand eight hundred and fourteen, 
and of the lands claimed by the Cherokee nation lying west of the Coosa and south of the Tennessee rivers. 

Art. 2. It is expressly agreed on the part of the Cherokee nation that the United States shall have the right to 
lay off, open, and have the free use of such road or roads through any part of the Cherokee nation lying north of 
the boundary line now established, as may be deemed necessary for the free intercourse between the States of Ten- 
nessee and Georgia and the Mississippi Territory. And the citizens of the United Slates shall freely navigate and 
use as a highway all the rivers and waters within the Cherokee nation. The Cherokee nation further agree to 
establish and keep up, on the roads to be opened under the sanction of this article, such ferries and public houses 
as may be necessary for the accommodation of the citizens of the United States. 

Art. 3. In order to preclude any dispute hereafter relative to the boundary line now established, it is hereby 
agreed that the Cherokee nation shall appoint two commissioners to accompany the commissioners already appointed 
on the part of the United States, to run the boundary lines of the lands ceded by the Creek nation to the United 
States, while they are engaged in running that part of the boundary established by the first article of this treaty. 

Art. 4. In order to avoid unnecessary expense and delay, it is further agreed that, whenever the President of 
the United States may deem it expedient to op'en a road through any part of the Cherokee nation, in pursuance of 
the stipulations of the second article of this convention, the principal chief of the Cherokee nation shall appoint one 
commissioner to accompany the commissioners appointed by the President of the United States, to lay off and mark 
the road; and the said commissioner shall be paid by the United States. 

Art. 5. The United Stales agree to indemnify the individuals of the Cherokee nation for losses sustained by 
them in consequence of the march of the militia and other troops in the service of the United States through that 
nation, which losses have been ascertained by the agents of the United States to amount to twenty-five thousand 
five hundred dollars. 

In testimony whereof, the said commissioner, and the undersigned chiefs and headmen of the Cherokee na- 
tion, have hereunto set their hands and seals. Done at the city of Washington, this twenty-second day 
of March, one thousand eight hundred and sixteen. 

GEORGE GRAHAM. 
[Signed, also, by the chiefs and headmen of the Cherokee nation.] 



REMONSTRANCE AGAINST THE TREATY. 

To the President of the United States of America: This memorial and remonstrance respectfully declareth: 

That one of the most inestimable privileges which freemen enjoy is the right of investigating the proceedings of 
those whose duty it is to advance the public weal, and remove the causes which have a tendency to produce public 
and individual injury. Availing ourselves of this sacred right, we, your memorialists, would respectfully submit a 
number of the grievances under which we labor in common with the people in this State; a candid and full 
examination of which, we trust, will produce a removal, so far as the power of doing this, or recommending it to be 
done, is vested in yourself. The people of this Slate know that their political and individual prosperity is much 
retarded, and they also believe that their rights are obstructed by two causes, connected with the relations of the 
United States with the Indian tribes: the first of which is a failure to extinguish the Indian claim to land within 
the chartered limits of this State; and the second is a cession to the Cherokee Indians of that tract of country 
south of Tennessee ceded to the United States by the Creek Indians, by the treaty held by General Jackson. 
We are more concerned on the latter subject, that the Government should have yielded to the Cherokees this tract, at 
the very time wHen the nation refused to sell for a full price to the United States a portion of land on the north 
side of Tennessee, within this State, which is of much importance to us, and in a measure useless to that nation. To 
show how far the existence of the Indian claim to the land within the chartered limits of this State is a political 
injury, and connected with the violation of individual right, we will beg leave to call your attention to the following 
facts: Previous to the formation of the constitution of the United States, and when the State of North Carolina 
possessed the absolute sovereignty of soil in what is now the State of Tennessee, each of the States having declared 
independence, and after the States had conquered their enemies, foreign and internal, the Legislature of that State, 
with much magnanimity and justice, offered for sale her western lands to her own citizens, to extinguish the debt 
which she owed to the war-worn soldiers of the Revolution; that debt was paid, and a fee-simple title was vested in 
the purchasers to a large portion of the lands within what is now the State of Tennessee. This took place in the 
years 1783 and 1784. At that time the title of the Indians to the lands sold by the State was not acknowledged by 
any treaty or law; and it was purchased, and grants obtained, under a confidence that possession could be had so soon 
as the Indian nations were conquered or would cease to be hostile. Few, if any, of the tribes of Indians ever actually 
inhabited the lands which were sold by the State of North Carolina. That portion of territory in which the 
Cherokee tribe were-settled south and east of Tennessee was reserved, when the boundary was prescribed of lands 
offered for sale. After the State of North Carolina had sold out the lands to redeem her public debt, the territory now 
composing, the State of Tennessee was ceded by North Carolina to the Congress of the United States, reserving, 
however, the rights of individuals holding grants, and the right to perfect the titles of such as had purchased lands 
from that State, which were not granted. Since that period the United States have, by treaties or compacts with the 
Cherokee and Chickasaw Indians, acknowledged a possessory right in those tribes to a large portion of the lands 
within this State; and that acknowledgment of title continues to exist, to the exclusion of citizens who have paid a 
fair price to North Carolina for those lands, more than thirty years since. Nay, the treaties purport to vest an 
12 £ 



90 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 143, 

absolute right to those lands in the Indians. A large portion of territory is unoccupied by the Indians on the north 
side of Tennessee, (except, perhaps, occasionally by a few straggling parties,) to which their title is unextinguished. 
This land is of vast importance in a political point of view to the State; it has also been granted by North Carolina, 
and the grantees are deprived of the enjoyment of their property; and yet the Cherokees refuse to sell it, with 
the same stubborn independence as if their title were absolute. An extensive and fertile tract is situate on the 
west of the inhabited part of this State, and extending to the Mississippi, which land was sold by North Carolina, 
and a great portion thereof granted nearly thirty years since. It is unsettled by the Indians, yet it is claimed bv 
the Chickasaw tribe; and the grantees of the land, who have a freehold in the soil, by purchase from the State, liav'e 
a more gloomy prospect of enjoying their property now than existed twenty years ago. Many individuals are 
deprived of their patrimony purchased by the blood of their fathers. The State is deprived of the political advan- 
tage arising from the settlement of a part of its soil, fertile beyond description, and rendered doubly important from 
its situation on the great navigable waters, which have become the highway to market of the produce raised by 
several millions of people. At the close of the American war, the absolute right to the vacant soil existed in the States, 
respectively; and the right was in the Indian tribes, most of whom were jconquered by the States. If this right 
existed in the States, we would inquire whether it be consistent with the principles of a free Government to exclude 
the individual owners of the soil from the enjoyment of their property? And we would humbly suggest the injustice 
of doing this, by laws or treaties made subsequent to the vested right of the owners. This is a grievance under 
which the citizens of the Stale of Tennessee have labored for many years past. In an humble and respectful 
manner has it been presented to the constituted authorities of the United States by the Legislature of our State, 
and by our Representatives and Senators in Congress. With painful emotion it has been seen that all exertions 
for its removal have failed. Yet, as citizens, we were respectfully silent, hoping each succeeding year would produce 
a change. We fondly looked forward to the time when the rights of our citizens would be considered as paramount to 
the rights of the Indians; and, of two conflicting claims, that that claim would be protected which would convert a 
pathless wilderness into peaceful habitations of freemen, yielding individual wealth and national prosperity; and, if an 
indemnity was necessary, it would be conferred on those whose claim was later in point of law and acknowledgment, 
and least in point of use and necessity. From the arrogant and aspiring pretensions of the adjacent tribes, we have 
no hope that they will voluntary yield, or even sell their claims. Recent events show that they desire to embrace 
every foot of territory which will lessen the facility of communication with the settlements on the Mississippi and 
Mobile, and retard the prosperity of this State. We would inquire, where is this matter to end? is it to be left to 
the will of the Cherokee and Chickasaw Indians? 

We would also call your attention to the peculiarity of our injury. In no other State do we know of a sale of 
lands, at an early period after the Revolution, where the purchasers are as yet deprived of the possession. In a few 
years the extinguishment of the Indian claim will be useless to the individual claimants. The destroyer Time will 
have soon demolished every trace or mark of the surveys and boundaries; and already almost every individual to 
whom they were known is consigned to the tomb. One other subject of complaint is the late cession to the Chero- 
kee Indians of so large a portion of the territory added to the United States by the treaty held with the Creeks 
by General Jackson. This is considered an evil of much magnitude, and we submit the following facts to prove 
that the Creeks were fully empowered to make the convej'ance to the United States by the treaty of 1814. It is 
clearly established, and it is here almost universally known, that at the first settlement of the western country, the 
territory in question was not held under the least color of claim by the Cherokees, but was in the possession of the 
Creeks, who continued to occupy it until the war in 1813, when the Creeks fled from villages within this territory, 
which were afterwards demolished by General Jackson. The chiefs and headmen of the Cherokees, even at that 
period, so far from claiming this land, declared to General Jackson that his army was in an enemy's country after 
crossing a small stream called Will's creek, twenty miles south of Fort Deposite, on the Tennessee river. From 
thence, southwardly, they said, the army was in the territory of the Creeks, and all the property was the property of 
the enemy. Of the truth of these facts abundant proof can be produced, sufficient to establish the same at any 
time when it may be desired. Did not the cession of this land to the United States by the Creeks vest in the peo- 
ple thereof prima facie evidence of title? If so, could the people be divested of this title by the act of the President 
and Senate? This committee humbly state that they do not think the constitution has vested this power in those 
branches of the Government. The cession of this territory to the United States was hailed with joy, as an era in the 
prosperity of Tennessee. By this, a communication would be had through a country inhabited by white men, and 
governed by laws, to the counties on the Mississippi and Mobile. We ever were informed the boundaries of the 
lands held by the Creeks were directed to be run by public authority, separating those lands from the Cherokees. 
We understand the line was run, and information thereof communicated to the proper office. But our satisfaction 
at this event was succeeded by surprise and regret, when we learned so much of this tract was ceded to the Chero- 
kees as would efiectually prevent that connexion in settlement with our fellow-citizens on the waters of the Mobile. 
We would ask, where is the policy of ceding this tract to the Cherokees, who are so tenacious of the territory which 
they already possess, that they will not surrender one acre without receiving what would be the value of the land? 
We would inquire, upon what principle of justice was this land ceded to the Cherokees? It was not useful to them 
for cultivation, nor due to them as a nation, to the exclusion of the people of the West, to whom the advantages 
from the occupation and settlement of this country were in some measure due, as a boon for its conquest. We 
applaud the course of policy adopted by the United States towards the Indians, replete with humanity, justice, and 
moderation; but we cannot agree that it is proper to sacrifice the convenience and welfare of so large a portion of 
the members of the community to gratify the cupidity of any tribe. The country bordering an the Tennessee, and 
occupied by the Creeks before the war of 1813, is that through which would pass the great highway from this State 
to New Orleans and Mobile. The country is fertile, and would soon be covered by a population of yeomanry, and 
become a perpetual barrier to the communication of the northern and southern tribes of Indians, who, from their 
intimate correspondence, produced such distressing effects subsequent to the declaration of war in 1812. Our citizens 
would then travel in security, without the risk of being murdered at every wigwam by some drunken savage, or of 
being ambushed and plundered until a safe passage is purchased by giving to the Indians money for permission to 
travel the public road. One of our neighbors a short time since was insulted, and afterwards murdered, on the road 
leading through that nation; and another of our most respectable citizens, when travelling with his family on the 
same road, was compelled to purchase his safe passage by his purse of money. The tribe will claim in palliation 
that such excesses are committed by drunken and profligate Indians, and perhaps will claim credit for surrendering 
such to be punished b}' our laws. These things, to us, are no satisfaction or security. The course of business re- 
quires frequent travelling along the roads leading through that country, and, while the Indians possess the soil from 
the Mississippi to Georgia, our citizens are not secure from attacks. We desire rather security against this mischief, 
than revenge for a murder when committed. If you will refer to the map of the country south of the State of Ten- 
nessee, and bring to mind that the produce of all the western country is sold at New Orleans, and that the Indians 
possess an extensive territory between this State and that market; that thousands of the citizens of Kentucky and Ten- 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEENTRIBES. 91 

nessee annually return by land, after selling their produce, and tliat this happens most frequently in the unhealthy 
season; that want of accommodation, sickness, insult, and injury, often await them through this Indian territory; 
that every year increases the quantity of produce for the market, and consequently the number of persons exposed 
to the evils enumerated — you will have but a faint idea of the magnitude of tlie object to the people of this sec- 
tion of the Union, and of the regret with wiiich they beheld that a free communication was no sooner obtained from 
the Creeks, than it was surrendered to the Cherokees. We cannot but believe that the policy of retaining this part of 
the country is so evident that it would not have been surrendered to the Cherokees, except from a mistaken belief that 
it of right belonged to that nation; and we believe, if the fact had been known to you that the Cherokee claim was 
founded altogether in pretence, and had no substantial existence, that this cession would not have been sanctioned. 
We have heard it suggested that the treaty of 1806 contained a pledge that the United States would acknowledge 
the claim of the Cherokees to this treaty. We will remark that the article in that treaty which speaks of the 
boundary of tiie Cherokee and Chickasaw Indians was evidently concluded by the Secretary of War, relying upon 
the representation of the Cherokees, and without a knowledge of the title of the respective tribes. It is beyond 
dispute that the land in question did not belong to, nor was it occupied by, either the Cherokees or Chickasaws, but 
was vested in the Creeks. An agreement on the part of tiie United States that they would endeavor to prevent 
collisions between the Cherokees and Chickasaws, by procuring the establishment of a certain boundary, did not, 
it seems to us, bind the United States to relinquish any title they might acquire from a third party, provided that 
third party had the better title, particularly when it is recollected that the projected boundary of the treaty of 1806 
never was established. We might still go further in depicting the evils to be produced from carrying this stipulation 
into eflect, after the treaty held with the Creeks by General Jackson, and after the boundaries were run and ascer- 
tained. This tract has been settled by a numerous population — by men whose lives and property have often been 
pledged to their Government. We will leave you to imagine the difficulty, distress, and dissatisfaction which 
will result from dispossessing this population of a country which was considered as a land of promise, and which 
they had prepared themselves to purchase by a sale of their interior possessions, and that this disposition should be 
made, that the country may remain a wilderness for the refuge of plunderers and murderers. We are also morti- 
fied that the treaty with the Cherokees should contain an imputation against the militia of this State, in making an 
appropriation of $25,500 for depredations pretended to be committed in their territory by the army of the United 
States. This claim, set up by the Cherokees, we believe, from good authority, to be unfounded. The language as 
well as the matter of this article is a subject of regret to the militia of Tennessee, since it implicates the character 
of their officers, who are virtually accused of leading bands of marauders, and allowing the most flagrant acts to 
pass unpunished. We would beg leave to bring to your notice the tedious and injurious system adopted by the War 
Department in the payment of accounts which have been created during the war in the quartermaster's office. 
The payment of these accounts has been postponed from time to time, to the great injury of those who hold unset- 
tled claims; and, as if to increase the difficulty, it has been lately ordered that these claims should be sent to Wash- 
ington for inspection, previous to their adjustment. The delay and risk of loss in transmitting the evidences of 
these claims are very great, and the difficulty of presenting demands, although entirely just, authenticated accord- 
ing to exact form, has been experienced by all interested in them, because the officers ordering the same paid are 
now at an immense distance from the place of their liquidation. All these embarrassments have in many instances 
created an expense equal to the amount of the demands producing it. The payment of the officers and soldiers for 
their services has been so long protracted, and so many difficulties presented, from the want of funds or otherwise, 
that many of the soldiers who braved the dangers of the field, and conquered the heroes of Britain, have not yet re- 
ceived the first cent for their services. 

This committee are assured that penury has not tied the pursestrings of the nation; that appropriations were 
made to satisfy all demands against the pay and quartermaster's departments in this district; therefore, we most 
respectfully inquire, what disposition has been made of the funds appropriated to satisfy the just claims on Govern- 
ment? 

The citizens of Tennessee deem the grievances which this committee have referred to as materially affecting 
the rights and happiness of the community at large; and are happy to believe that they have, by their recent and 
unparalleled display of patriotism and valor, secured to themselves the plaudits of the American people, and are 
justly entitled to a prompt removal of all the causes hereby noticed, which so materially aflect the present and future 
destiny of this country. 

For and in behalf of the citizens of Davidson county: 

JENKIN WHITESIDES, 1 

JAMES TRIMBLE, | 

WASHINGTON L. HANNUM, i Committee. 
ALFRED BALCH, | 

WILLIAM CARROLL, J 

[Note. — The documents referred to in the message were returned to the War Department after the ratification 
of the treaty and convention, and are not now to be found.] 



14th Congress.] No. ]44. [2d Session. 

TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 

COMMUNICATED TO THE SENATE, DECEMBER 10, 1816. 

To the Senate of the United States: December 10, 1816. 

I lay before the Senate, for their consideration and advice as to a ratification, treaties concluded with the 
several Indian tribes, according to the following statement: 

.4 list of Indian tribes tvith whom treaties have been made since the last session of Congress, viz: 
Weas and Kickapoos. — Treaty concluded at Fort Harrison, between Benjamin Parke and the chiefs and 
headmen of those tribes, June 4, 1816. 



92 INDIANAFFAIRS. [No. 144. 

Ottawas, Chippewas, and Pattawatamies. — Treaty concluded at St. Louis, between Governors Clark and 
Edwards, and Colonel Chouteau, and the chiefs and headmen of those tribes, August 24, 1816. 

Wlnnebagoes. — Treaty made by the same persons on the part of the United States, and the headmen of this 
tribe, at St. Louis, June 3, 1816. 

Sacs of Rock river. — Treaty made by same, at St. Louis, May 13, 1816. 

Sioux composing three tribes — the Sioux af the Leaf, the Sioux of the Broad Leaf, and the Sioux who shoot 
on the Pine Tops. — Treaty made and concluded by the same, at St. Louis, June 1, 1816. 

Chickasaws. — Treaty made by General .lackson, David Meriwether, Esq., and Jesse Franklin, Esq., and the 
headmen of that nation, at Chickasaw council-house, September 20, 1816. 

Cherokees. — Treaty made by General JacUson, David Meriwether, Esq., and Jesse Franklin, Esq., and the 
headmen of that nation, at Turkeytown, October 4, 1816. 

Ckoctaws. — Treaty made by General John Cofifee, John Rhea, and John McKee, Esqrs., and the headmen and 
warriors of that nation, at the Choctaw trading-house, October 24, 1816. 

JAMES MADISON. 



TREATY WITH THE CHEROKEES. 

To perpetuate peace and friendsi)ip between tiie United States and Cherokee tribe or nation of Indians, and to 
remove all future causes of dissension which may arise from indefinite territorial boundaries, the President of the 
United States of America, by Major General Andrew Jackson, General David Meriwether, and Jesse Franklin, 
Esq., commissioners plenipotentiary on the one part, and the Cherokee delegates on the other, covenant and agree 
to the following articles and conditions, which, when approved by the Cherokee nation, and constitutionally ratified 
by the Government of the United Slates, shall be binding on all parties: 

AiiTicLB 1. Peace and friendship are hereby firmly established between the United States and Cherokee nation 
or tribe of Indians. 

Art. 2. The Cherokee nation acknowledge the following as their western boundary south of the Tennessee 
river: Commenting at Camp Coffee, on the south side of the Tennessee river, which is opposite the Chickasaw Island; 
running from thence, a due south course, to the top of the dividing ridge between the waters of the Tennessee and 
Tombicbee rivers; thence, eastwardly, along said ridge, leaving the head waters of the Black Warrior to the right 
hand, until opposed by the west branch of Will's creek; down the east bank of said creek, to the Coosa river, and 
down said river. 

Art. 3. The Cherokee nation relinquish to the United States all claim, and cede all title, to lands lying south 
and west of the line as described in the second article; and, in consideration of said relinquishment and cession, 
the commissioners agree to allow to the Cherokee nation an annuity of $6,000, to continue for ten successive years, 
and $5,000, to be paid in sixty days after the ratification of the treaty, as a compensation for any improvements 
which the said nation may have had on the lands surrendered. 

Art. 4. The two contracting parties covenant and agree that the line, as described in the second article, shall 
be ascertained and marked by commissioners, to be appointed by the President of the United States; that the 
marks shall be bold; trees to be blazed on both sides of the line, and the fore and aft trees to be marked with the 
letters U. S.; that the commissioners shall be accompanied by two persons, to be appointed by the Cherokee nation; 
and that«aid nation shall have due and seasonable notice when said operation is to be commenced. 

Art. 5. It is stipulated that the Cherokee nation will meet General Andrew Jackson, General David Meri- 
wether, and Jesse Franklin, Esq., in council, at Turkeytown, Coosa river, on the 28lh of September instant, 
there and then to express their approbation, or not, of the articles of this treaty; and if they do not assemble at the 
time and place specified, it is understood that the said commissioners may report the same as a tacit ratification, on 
the part of the Cherokee nation, of this treaty. 

In testimony whereof, the said commissioners, and undersigned chiefs and delegates of the Cherokee nation, 
have hereto set their hands and seals. Done at the Chickasaw council-house, this fourteenth day of 
September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixteen. 

ANDREW JACKSON, 
DAVID MERIWETHER, 
JESSE FRANKLIN. 
[Signed, also, by the chiefs and headmen of the Cherokee nation.] 



TREATY WITH THE CHICKASAWS. 

To settle all territorial controversies, and to perpetuate that peace and harmony which has long happily 
subsisted between the United States and Chickasaw nation, the President of the United States of America, by 
Major General Andrew Jackson, General David Meriwether, and Jesse Franklin, Esq., on the one pari, and the 
whole Chickasaw nation in council assembled, on the other, have agreed on the following articles, which, when 
ratified by the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate of the United States, shall be binding on all 
parties: 

Article 1. Peace and friendship are hereby firmly established and perpetuated between the United States of 
America and Chickasaw nation. 

Art. 2. The Chickasaw nation cede to the United States (with the exception of such reservations as shall here- 
after be specified) all right or title to lands on the north side of the Tennessee river, and relinquish all claim to 
territory on the south side of said river, and east of a line commencing at the mouth of Caney creek, running up 
said creek to its source; thence, a due south course, to the ridge path, or commonly called Gaines's road; along said 
road, southwesterly, to a point on the Tombigbee river well known by the name of the Cotton Gin Port; and down 
the west bank of the Tombigbee to the Choctaw boundary. 

Art. 3. In consideration of the relinquishment of claim and cession of lands made in the preceding article, 
the commissioners agree to allow the Chickasaw nation $12,000 per annum for ten successive years, and $4,500, 
to be paid in sixty days after the ratification of this treaty into the hands of Levi Colbert, as a compensation for 
any improvements which individuals of the Chickasaw nation may have had on the lands surrendered; that is to 
say, $2,000 for improvements on the east side of the Tombigbee, and $2,500 for improvements on the north side 
of the Tennessee river. 

Art. 4. The commissioners agree that the following tracts of land shall be reserved to the Chickasaw nation: 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 93 

1. One tract of land for the use of Colonel George Colbert and heirs, and which is thus described by said Colbert: 
" Beginning on the north bank of the Tennessee river, at a point that, running north four miles, will include a big spring 
about half-way between his ferry and the mouth of Cypress, it being a spring that a large cow-path crosses its 
branch near where a cypress tree is cut down; thence, westwardly, to a point four miles from the Tennessee river, 
and standing due north of a point on the north bank of the river, three miles below his ferry on the Tennessee 
river; and up the meanders of said river to the beginning point." 

2. A tract of land two miles square, on the north bank of the Tennessee river, and at its junction with Beacli 
creek, for the use of Appassan Tubby and heirs. 

3. A tract of land one mile square, on the north side of the Tennessee river, for the use of John McCleish and 
heirs; the said tract to be so run as to include the said McCleish's settlement and improvements on the north side 
of Buffalo creek. 

4. Two tracts of land, containing forty acres each, on the south side of Tennessee river, and about two and a 
half miles below the Cotton Gin Port, on the Tombigbee river; which tracts of land will be pointed out by Major 
Levi Colbert, and for the use of said Colbert and heirs. 

It is stipulated that the above reservations shall appertain to the Chickasaw nation only so long as they shall be 
occupied, cultivated, or used by the present proprietors or heirs; and in the event of all or either of said tracts of 
land so reserved being abandoned by the present proprietors or heirs, each tract or tracts of land so abandoned 
shall revert to the United States as a portion of that territory ceded by the second article of the treaty. 

Art. 5. The two contracting parties covenant and agree that the line on the south side of the Tennessee river, 
as described in the second article of this treaty, shall be ascertained and marked by commissioners to be appointed 
by the President of the United States; that the marks shall be bold; trees to be blazed on both sides of the line, and 
the fore and aft trees to be marked with the letters U. S. That the commissioners shall be attended by two per- 
sons to be designated by the Chickasaw nation, and that the said nation shall have due and seasonable notice when 
said operation is to be commenced. 

Art. 6. In consideration of the conciliatory disposition evinced during the negotiation of this treat}' by the Chicka- 
saw chiefs and warriors, but more particularly as a manifestation of the friendship and liberality of the President 
of the United States, the commissioners agree to give, on the ratification of this treaty, to Chinnubby, king of the 
Chickasaws, to Tishshomingo, William McGilvery, ArpasarShtubby, Samuel Seely, James Brown, Levi Colbert, 
IckaryoucuUaha, George Pettygrove, Iramartarharmicko, Chickasaw chiefs, and to Malcolm McGee, interpreter, 
one hundred and fifty dollars each, in goods or cash, as may be preferred; and to Major William Glover, Colonel 
George Colbert, Captain Rabbitt, Hoparyeahoummar, Immoukelourshsharhoparyea, HoparyeahouUartir, Tushker- 
hopoyea, Hoparyeahoummar, jun., Immoukelusharhopoy3'ea, James Colbert, Coweamarthlar, and Illachouwar- 
hopoyea, military leaders, one hundred dollars each; and, as a particular mark of distinction and favor for his long 
services and faithful adherence to the United States Government, the commissioners agree to allow to General 
William Colbert an annuity of one hundred dollars for and during his life. 

Art. 7. Whereas the chiefs and warriors of the Chickasaw nation have found, from experience, that the crowd 
of pedlars who are constantly traversing their nation from one end to the other is of a serious disadvantage to the 
nation; that serious misunderstandings and disputes frequently take place, as well as frauds, which are often prac- 
tised on the ignorant and uninformed of the nation, therefore it is agreed by the commissioners on the part of the 
Government, and the chiefs of the nation, that no more licenses shall be granted by the agent of the Chickasaws to 
entitle any person or persons to trade or traffic merchandise in said nation; and that any person or persons whom- 
soever, of the white people, who shall bring goods and sell them in the nation, contrary to this article, shall forfeit 
the whole of his or their goods, one-half to the nation and the other half to the Government of the United States. 
In all cases where this article is violated, and the goods are taken or seized, they shall be delivered up to the agent, 
who shall hear the testimony and judge accordingly. 

This article was presented to the commissioners by the chiefs and warriors of the Chickasaw nation, and, by 
their particular solicitation, embraced in this treaty. 

In testimony whereof, the said commissioners and undersigned chiefs and warriors have set their hands and 
seals. Done at the Chickasaw council-house, this twentieth day of September, in the year of our 
Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixteen. 

ANDREW JACKSON, 
D. MERIWETHER, 
J. FRANKLIN. 
[Signed, also, by the chiefs and warriors of the Chickasaw nation.] 



TREATY WITH THE WEAS AND KICKAPOOS. 

Articles of a treaty made and entered into at Fort Harrison, in the Indiana Territot-y, between Benjamin Parke, 
specially authorized thereto by the President of the United States, of the one part, and the tribes of Indians, 
called the Weas and Kiclcapoos, by their chiefs and headmen, of the other part. 

Article 1. The Weas and Kickapoos again acknowledge themselves in peace and friendship with the United 
States. 

Art. 2. The said tribes acknowledge the validity of, and declare their determination to adhere to, the treat}' 
of Greenville, made in the year seventeen hundred and ninety-five, and all subsequent treaties which they have 
respectively made with the United States. 

Art. 3. The boundary line surveyed and marked by the United States of the land on the Wabash and White 
rivers, ceded in the year eighteen hundred and nine, the said tribes do hereby explicitly recognise and confirm, as 
having been executed conformably to the several treaties they have made with the United States. 

Art. 4. The chiefs and warriors of the said tribe of the Kickapoos acknowledge that they have ceded to the 
United States all that tract of country which lies between the aforesaid boundary line on the northwest side of the 
Wabash, the Wabash, the Vermilion river, and a line to be drawn from the northwest corner of the said boundary 
line, so as to strike the Vermilion river twenty miles in a direct line from its mouth, according to the terms and 
conditions of the treaty they made with the United States on the ninth day of December, in the year eighteen hun- 
dred and nine. 

In testimony whereof, the said Benjamin Parke, and the chiefs and headmen of the said tribes, have here- 
unto set their hands and affixed their seals, at Fort Harrison, in the Indiana Territory, the fourth day 
of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixteen. 

B. PARKE. 
[Signed, also, by the chiefs and headmen of the Wea and Kickapoo tribes.] 



94 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 144, 

TREATY WITH THE SACS OF ROCK RIVER. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 

Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 

States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors of the Sacs of Rock river and the adjacent 

country, of the other part. 

Whereas, by the ninth article of the treaty of peace which was concluded on the twenty-fourth day of Decem- 
ber, eighteen hundred and fourteen, between the United States and Great Britain, at Ghent, and which was ratified 
by the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate, on the seventeenth day of February, eighteen hun- 
dred and fifteen, it was stipulated that the said parties should severally put an end to all hostilities with the Indian 
tribes with whom they might be at war at the time of the ratification of said treaty, and to place the said tribes 
inhabiting their respective territories on the same footing upon which they stood before the war: Provided, They 
should agree to desist from all hostilities against the said parties, their citizens or subjects, respectively, upon the 
ratification of the said treaty being notified to them, and should so desist accordingly: 

And whereas the United States being determined to execute every article of the treaty with perfect good faith, 
and wishing to be particularly exact in the execution of the article above alluded to relating to the Indian tribes, 
the President, in consequence thereof, for that purpose, on the eleventh day of March, eighteen hundred and fif- 
teen, appointed the undersigned William Clark, Governor of Missouri Territory, Ninian Edwards, Governor of 
Illinois Territory, and Auguste Chouteau, Esq., of the Missouri Territory, commissioners, with full power to con- 
clude a treaty of peace and amity with all those tribes of Indians, conformably to the stipulations contained in the 
said article, on the part of the United States, in relation to such tribes: 

And whereas the commissioners, in conformity with their instructions in the early part of last year, notified 
the Sacs of Rock river and the adjacent country of the time of the ratification of said treaty; of the stipulations 
it contained in relation to them; of the disposition of the American Government to fulfil those stipulations, by en- 
tering into a treaty with them conformably thereto, and invited the said Sacs of Rock river and the adjacent 
country to send forward a deputation of their chiefs to meet the said commissioners at Portage des Sioux, for the 
purpose of concluding such a treaty as aforesaid between the United States and the said Indians; and the said Sacs 
of Rock river and the adjacent country having not only declined that friendly overture, but having continued their hos- 
tilities, and committed many depredations thereafter, which would have justified the infliction of the severest chas- 
tisement upon them; but having earnestly repented of their conduct, now imploring mercy, and being anxious to 
return to the habits of peace and friendship with the United States; and the latter being always disposed to pur- 
sue the most liberal and humane policy towards the Indian tribes within their territory, preferring their reclamation 
by peaceful measures to their punishment b}' the application of the military force of the nation: Now, therefore, 

The said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as aforesaid, and the under- 
signed chiefs and warriors as aforesaid, for the purpose of restoring peace and friendship between the parties, do 
agree to the following articles: 

Article 1. The Sacs of Rock river and the adjacent country do hereby unconditionally assent to, recognise, 
re-establish, and confirm the treaty between the United States of America and the united tribes of Sacs and Foxes, 
which was concluded at St. Louis on the third day of November, one thousand eight hundred and four, as well as 
all other contracts and agreements heretofore made between the Sac tribe or nation and the United States. 

Art. 2. The United States agree to place the aforesaid Sacs of Rock river on the same footing upon which 
they stood before the war: Provided, They shall, on or before the first day of July next, deliver up to the officer 
commanding at Cantonment Davis, on the Mississippi, all the property they or any of their tribe have phmdered or 
stolen from the citizens of the United States since they were notified as aforesaid of the time of the ratification of 
the late treaty between the United States and Great Britain. 

Art. 3. If the said tribes shall fail or neglect to deliver up the property aforesaid, or any part thereof, on or 
before the first day of July aforesaid, they shall forfeit to the United States all right and title to their proportion of 
the annuities which, by the treaty of St. Louis, were covenanted to be paid to the Sac tribe; and the United States 
shall forever afterwards be exonerated from the payment of so much of said annuities as, upon a fair distribution, 
would fall to the share of that portion of the Sacs who are represented by the undersigned chiefs and warriors. 

Art. 4. This treaty shall take effect and be obligatory on the contracting parties, unless the same shall be dis- 
approved by the President and Senate of the United States, or by the President only; and, in the mean time, all 
hostilities shall cease from this date. 

In testimony whereof, the said William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners as 
aforesaid, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors as aforesaid, have hereunto set their hands and affixed 
their seals this thirteenth day of May, one thousand eight hundred and sixteen. 

WILLIAM CLARK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 
AUGUSTE CHOUTEAU. 
[Signed, al^o, by the chiefs and warriors of the Sacs of Rock river and the adjacent country.] 



TREATY WITH THE SIOUX. 

A treaty of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Auguste 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors, representing eight bands of the Sioux, 
composing the three tribes called the Sioux of the Leaf, the Sioux of the Broad Leaf, and the Sioux who 
shoot in the Pine Tops, on the part and behalf of their said tribes, of the other part. 
The parties being desirous of re-establishing peace and friendship between the United States and the said tribes, 

and of being placed in all things and in every respect on the same footing upon which they stood before the late war 

between the United States and Great Britain, have agreed to the following articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility committed by one or either of the contracting parties against the 

other shall be mutually forgiven and forgot. 

Art. 2. There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between all the citizens of the United States and all the 

individuals composing the aforesaid tribes; and all the friendly relations that existed between them before the war 

shall be, and the same are hereby, renewed. 

Art. 3. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves and their tribes, respectively, do by these presents 

confirm to the United States all and every cession or cessions of land heretofore made by their tribes to the British, 

French, or Spanish Governments, within the limits of the United States or their territories; and the parties here 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 95 

contracting do, moreover, in the sincerity of mutual friendship, recognise, re-establish, and confirm all and every 
treaty, contract, and agreement heretofore concluded between the United States and the said tribes or nations. 

Art. 4. The undersigned chiefs and warriors as aforesaid, for themselves and their said tribes, do hereby 
acknowledge themselves to be under the protection of the United States, and of no other nation, power, or sovereign 
whatsoever. 

In witness whereof, the commissioners aforesaid, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors as aforesaid, have 
hereunto subscribed their names and affixed their seals this first day of June, in the year of our Lord one 
thousand eight hundred and sixteen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

WILLIAM CL.\RK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 
AUGUSTE CHOUTEAU. 
[Signed, also, by the chiefs and warriors of the aforesaid tribes of Sioux.] 



TREATY WITH THE CHOCTAWS. 

James Madison, President of the United States of America, by General John Coflee, John Rhea, and John 
McKee, esquires, commissioners on the part of the United States duly authorized for that purpose, on the one part, 
and the mingoes, leaders, captains, and warriors of the Choctaw nation in general council assembled, in behalf of 
themselves and tiie whole nation, on the other part, have entered into the following articles, which, when ratified by 
the President of the United States, with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall be obligatory on both parties: 
Article 1. The Choctaw nation, for the consideration hereafter mentioned, cede to the United States all their 
title and claim to lands lying east of the following boundary: Beginning at the mouth of Ooktibbuha, the Chickasaw 
boundary, and running from thence down the Tombigbee river until it intersects the northern boundary of a cession 
made to the United States by the Choctaws, at Mount Dexter, on the 16th November, 1805. 

Art. 2. In consideration of the foregoing cession, the United States engage to pay to the Choctaw nation the, 
sum of six thousand dollars, annually, for twenty years; they also agree to pay them in merchandise, to be delivered 
immediately on signing the present treaty, the sum of ten thousand dollars. 

Done and executed in full and open council at the Choctaw trading-house, this twenty-fourth day of October, 
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixteen, and of the independence of the United 
States the forty-first. JOHN COFFEE, 

JOHN RHEA, 
JOHN McKEE. 
[Signed, also, by the mingoes, leaders, captains, and warriors of the Choctaw nation.] 



TREATY WITH THE WINNEBAGOES. 
A treat!/ of peace and friendship made and concluded between William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and Augusta 
Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of the said 
States, of the one part, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors of that portion of the Winnebago tribe or 
nation residing on the Ouisconsin river, of the other part. 

Whereas the undersigned chiefs and warriors, as well as that portion of the nation which they represent, have 
separated themselves from the rest of their nation, and reside in a village on the Ouisconsin river, and are desirous 
of returning to a state of friendly relations with the United States, the parties hereto have agreed to the following 
articles: 

Article 1. Every injury or act of hostility committed by one or either of the contracting parties against the 
other shall be mutually forgiven and forgot; and all the friendly relations that existed between them before the late 
war shall be, and the same are hereby, renewed. 

Art. 2. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves and those they represent, do, by these presents, 
confirm to the United States all and every cession of land heretofore made by their nation to the British, French, or 
Spanish Governments within the limits of the United States or their territories; and also all and every treaty, con- 
tract, and agreement heretofore concluded between the United States and the said tribe or nation, as far as their 
interest in the same extends. 

Art. 3. The undersigned chiefs and warriors as aforesaid, for themselves and those they represent, do hereby 
acknowledge themselves to be under the protection of the United States, and of no other nation, power, or sover- 
eign whatsoever. 

Art. 4. The aforesaid chiefs and warriors, for themselves and those they represent, do further promise to re- 
main distinct and separate from the rest of their tribe or nation, giving them no aid or assistance whatever, until 
peace shall also be concluded between the United States and the said tribe or nation. 

Art. 5. The contracting parties do hereby agree, promise, and oblige themselves, reciprocally, to deliver up 
all prisoners now in their hands (by what means soever the same may have come into their possession) to the officer 
commanding at Prairie du Chien, to be by him restored to the respective parties hereto, as soon as it may be prac- 
ticable. 

In witness whereof, the commissioners aforesaid, and the undersigned chiefs and warriors as aforesaid, have 
hereunto subscribed their names and affixed their seals this third day of June, in the year of our Lord 
one thousand eight hundred and sixteen, and of the independence of the United States the fortieth. 

WILLIAM CLARK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 
AUGUSTE CHOUTEAU. 
[Signed, also, by the chiefs and warriors of the Winnebago tribe.] 



TREATY AVITH THE OTTAWAS, CHIPPEWAS, AND PATTAWATAMIES. 

A treaty of peace, friendship, and limits, made and concluded hetioeen Ninian Edwards, William Clark, and 
Auguste Chouteau, commissioners plenipotentiary of the United States of America, on the part and behalf of 
said States, of the one part, and the chiefs and warriors of the united tribes of Ottawas, Chippewas, and 
Pattawatamies residing on the Illinois and 31ilwalky rivers and their waters, and on the southwestern parts 
of Lake Michigan, of the other part. 
Whereas a serious dispute has, for some time past, existed between the contracting parties relative to the right 

to a part of the lands ceded to the United States by the tribes of Sacs and Foxes on the third day of November, 



96 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 144, 

one thousand eight hundred and four, and both parties being desirous of preserving an harmonious and friendly in- 
tercourse, and of establishing permanent peace and friendship, have, for the purpose of removing all difficulties, 
agreed to the following terms: 

Article 1. The said chiefs and warriors, for themselves and the tribes they represent, agree to relinquish, and 
hereby do relinquish, to the United States, all their right, claim, and title to all the land contained in the before- 
mentioned cession of the Sacs and Foxes which lies south of a due west line from the southern extremity of Lake 
Michigan to the Mississippi river. And they moreover cede to the United States all the land contained within the fol- 
lowing bounds, to wit: Beginning on the left bank of the Fox river of Illinois, ten miles above the mouth of said Fox 
river; thence, running so as to cross Sandy creek ten miles above its mouth; thence, in a direct line, to a point ten 
miles north of the west end of the Portage, between Chicago creek, which empties into Lake Michigan, and the 
river Des Pleines, a fork of the Illinois; thence, in a direct line, to a point on Lake Michigan, ten miles northward of 
the mouth of Chicago creek; thence, along the lake, to a point ten miles southward of the mouth of the said Chi- 
cago creek; thence, in a direct line, to a point on the Kankakee, ten miles above its mouth; thence, with the said 
Kankakee and the Illinois river, to the mouth of Fox river; and thence to the beginning: Provided, nevertheless. 
That the said tribes shall be permitted to hunt and to fish within the limits of the land hereby relinquished and ceded, 
so long as it may continue to be the property of the United States. 

Art. 2. In consideration of the aforesaid relinquishment and cession, the United States have this day delivered 
to said tribes a considerable quantity of merchandise, and do agree to pay them, annually, for the term of twelve 
j'ears, goods to the value of one thousand dollars, reckoning that value at the first cost of the goods in the city or place 
in which they shall be purchased, without any charge for transportation; which said goods shall be delivered to the 
said tribes at some place on the Illinois river not lower down than Peoria. And the said United States do more- 
over agree to relinquish to the said tribes all the land contained in the aforesaid cession of the Sacs and Foxes which 
lies north of a due west line from the southern extremity of Lake Michigan to the Mississippi river, except three 
leagues square at the mouth of the Ouisconsin river, including both banks, and such other tracts on or near to the 
Ouisconsin and Mississippi rivers as the President of the United States may think proper to reserve: Provided, 
That such other tracts shall not, in the whole, exceed the quantity that would be contained in five leagues square. 

Art. 3. The contracting parties, that peace and friendship may be permanent, promise that, in all things what- 
ever, they will act with justice and correctness towards each other; and that they will, with perfect good faith, fulfil 
all the obligations imposed upon them by former treaties. 

In witness whereof, the said Ninian Edwards, William Clark, and Auguste Chouteau, commissioners afore- 
said, and the chiefs and warriors of the aforesaid tribes, have hereunto subscribed their names and affixed 
their seals this twenty-fourth day of August, one thousand eight hundred and sixteen, and of the inde- 
pendence of the United States the forty-first. 

NINIAN EDWARDS, 
WILLIAM CLARK, 
AUGUSTE CHOUTEAU. 
[Signed, also, by the chiefs and warriors of the Ottawas, Chippewas, and Pattawatamies.] 



Gentlemen: Department of War, May 3, 1816. 

Difficulties having arisen in surveying the public lands upon the Wabash, from the vague terms in which 
boundaries of the cession have been described, or from the interested and improper views of some of the chiefs of 
the various tribes from whom the cession was obtained, the President has determined to remove them by amicable 
discussions and explanations, and by giving them an equivalent for the claims or pretensions which they still set up 
to some part of the lands in question. To accomplish this desirable object, he has directed me to place at your 
disposition the sum of five thousand dollars, over and above their annuities, which you are authorized to distribute 
to them for the purpose of conciliating the various tribes from whom the purchase was originally made, and such 
other tribes as may be present who lay any species of claim to these lands. It is not judged expedient to sufl'er the 
validity of the treaties which made the cession to be in any manner called into question; but if there is no difficultv 
of obtaining a general recognition of them on the part of all the tribes, it may not be improper to reduce their ac- 
knowledgment into the form of a treaty, attended with the accustomed solemnities. In the communications which 
you make to them, they must be distinctly made to understand that this measure has proceeded alone from the jus- 
tice, moderation, and friendly disposition of the President towards them. It is of great importance that they should 
be thoroughly convinced that the liberality of the President in this case has not proceeded from any apprehension 
of their arms. The difference between the strength and resources of the United States, compared with the whole 
body of Indians, must convince the reflecting part of their warriors that apprehension of Indian aggression can 
never enter into the views of the President in negotiating with them. Nothing could be more fatal to the Indian 
race than an impression of this nature. At the same time, it is desirable that they should be deeply impressed with 
the views of justice, moderation, and benevolence by which the councils of the President are regulated towards his 
Indian neighbors. The President relies upon your zeal, talents, and discretion in conducting this negotiation, and 
making those impressions upon the Indian chiefs which are equally necessary to their own welfare and to the in- 
terest of the United States. 

The people of the Indiana Territory have petitioned the President to make an effort to extinguish the Indian 
title to a district of country lying contiguous to the land in question. Whilst the President is disposed to gratify 
the wishes of the petitioners, and is solicitous to promote the growth and prosperity of the Territory in which they 
reside, he is unwilling to press the Indian tribes for cessions of land which they are not disposed to sell. Their 
dispositions upon this point may be sounded, but importunity is to be avoided. 
I have the honor to be, &c. 

WILLIAM H. CRAWFORD. 

P. S. As the goods which have been ordered on for the annuities of the Indian tribes who are to be convened 
on the 22d instant will not arrive in time, you are authorized to draw upon the Department for the amount speci- 
fied in the foregoing instructions. 

W. H. C. 
Benjamin Parke, and Fidelio C. Sharp, 

Commissioners to hold a treaty with certain tribes of Indians at Fort Harrison, Ind. T. 



1816.] TREATIES WITHTHIRTEEN TRIBES. 97 

Gentlemen: Department of War, May 7, 1S16. 

Your several letters on the subject of Indian negotiation have been received, and submitted to the President. 
The idea of obtaining cessions of land from distant tribes of Indians, as the consideration for granting them annuities, 
as has been done with those more immediately in our neighborhood, has been deliberately examined. Considering 
the vast extent of country to which the Indian title lias been extinguished, and which is now ready to be offered for 
sale and settlement, the public interest, so far as the demand for land is in question, does not require any additional 
cessions from the Indians. The situation of particular States or Territories may render it expedient to extinguish 
the Indian title to certain districts of country, with the view of making the settlement more compact, or for other 
local purposes. Cessions from distant tribes cannot be considered desirable in any point of view. Our settlements are 
already extended greatly beyond what the public interest requires. The propensity of our frontier settlers to spread 
over the surface of ever^' cession, however distant, affords an additional inducement to decline them. Should this 
disposition be restrained by the timely vigilance of the Government, the lapse of time between liie cession and the 
actual settlement will, as in the case of the lands now surveying on the Wabash, give rise to disputes with the tribes 
making the cession, or with their neighbors who may have conflicting claims to the lands. Every offer of this kind 
must, therefore, be declined. It maybe expedient to engage to make them annual presents, according to the num- 
ber and character of their respective tribes. Perhaps the better mode will be to give them assurances that their 
situation will be correctly represented to the President, who will direct that an allowance shall be made to them, 
annually, according to their numbers and wants. 

As the validity of the Illinois cession is contested by some of the Indian tribes who have used it as a hunting 
ground, the President has directed me to instruct you to use your best endeavors to quiet these claims. This may 
be done by giving them presents in consideration of their relinquishment of their supposed right to the land in ques- 
tion, or it may be effected by the stipulation to pay them an ansual stipend proportioned to the colorable title which 
inSy be supposed to exist. Should the nations who originally ceded the lands set up any kind of claim to it, their 
demands should be promptly repelled; but presents may be given them in case of their acquiescence in the original 
cession. As this cession is very extensive, and greatly exceeds the demands for lands in that quarter, and would 
withal, if settled, produce the necessity of establishing another Territorial Government, and give rise to a small 
settlement in the Indiana Territory, separated by an immense distance from the inhabited parts of the Territory, 
the President has deemed it expedient to ofl'er, as an equivalent for the relinquishment of any conflicting claim to 
those lands, the recession of such parts as lie north of the northern line of the State of Ohio, extending westwardly 
to the Mississippi river, and east of the western boundary of the Indiana Territory. In tendering this cession, a 
reservation for a military post at the mouth of the Ouisconsin, including both banks of the river, must be made, and 
such other reservations for the same object as your knowledge of the country to be receded may render necessary. 
The relinquishment of all Indian title to the lands south and west of the lines above defined, in consideration of the 
proposed recession, will be more acceptable to the President than if obtained by purchase. Considering the extent 
of the country proposed to be receded, there is every reason to believe that the various tribes exhibiting claims to 
it will readily acquiesce in the proposition. Should the proposition be rejected, you will then proceed to the dis- 
cussion of the consideration which it will be proper to give them. The slight degree of information possessed by 
the Department precludes any precise instruction as to the amount of the consideration which ought to be given. 
This is left to your discretion. It is conceived that you had better err on the side of liberality, taking into view the 
nature and validity of their respective claims. Twenty thousand dollars have been ordered to St. Louis, to be 
placed at your disposition, to be distributed in presents to the various tribes with whom you may have to treat. 
This sum is exclusive of the consideration which you may find it necessary to promise for the purpose of quieting 
Indian claims to the Illinois purchase. Should the tribes inhabiting the country between the cession and the south- 
western margin of Lake Michigan present themselves, you are required to sound their disposition to cede a district 
of country which will connect the lake with the Illinois purchase. This cession would be of immense importance, 
and should be obtained, if practicable, at any expense, either of recession or purchase. In all other cases, importu- 
nity to cede is expressly interdicted. 

It is not known whether any other tribes claiming the margin of the lake will attend the approaching negotia- 
tion. The instruction, is given on the ground that they may possibly attend. 
I have the honor to be, &c. 

WILLIAM H. CRAWFORD. 

Messrs. Clark, Edwards, and Chouteau, St. Louis. 



Gentlemen: ' Department of War, ^«y 27, 1816. 

Your communication of the 29lh ultimo has been received, and submitted to the President. 

The conduct of the Cherokees, in referring their dispute with the Osages to the decision of the officers of the 
United States, deserves and has received the decided approbation of the President. 

Under all the circumstances of the case, the course which you have adopted seems to be judicious, and such as 
will most probably produce the desired effect. 

If you have not already adopted measures necessary for convening the chiefs of those tribes as well as of the 
Quapaws, it is deemed expedient that steps should be promptly taken to effect that object. 

If the Quapaws have claims to the lands ceded to the United States, and it should appear that their claim is 
well founded, it should be admitted; or an equivalent given for it, either by the payment of a gross sum, by an an- 
nuity for a term of years, or in perpetuity. Perhaps an annuity for a certain number of years will be the most 
eligible mode. 

Whilst negotiating with the Osage tribe, provision should be made for running the lines of the cession made by 
them to the United States. 

If it is thought expedient, as you have intimated, to change the boundaries of that treaty, it will be necessary to 
explain to this Department, without delay, the nature and effect of the change contemplated, and the reasons which 
are supposed to require it. 

It is deemed by the President inexpedient to obtain cessions of land from the Indians which are not required 
for settlement. Experience has proved the extreme difficulty of preventing persons from making settlements upon 
the most remote points of every cession before the land is offered for sale, by which the whole frontier is rendered 
utterly inadequate to its protection against Indian warfare. 

The adjustment of the Cherokee claim to the settlements they have made under the permission given them by 

Mr. Jefferson will necessarily occupy your attention. It is difficult to give precise instructions upon this subject. 

In deciding upon it, you must keep in view the fact that the Cherokee nation refuse to make any cession of their 

lands in consideration of the settlements which have been assigned to their countrymen. This may have proceeded, 

13 E 



98 INDIANAFFAIRS. [So. 144. 

in some degree, from a knowledge that no lands had' been specifically assigned to the Cherokee emigrants by the 
United States. In any arrangements of this kind, there ought to be an express provision that an assignment should 
not be binding upon the United States, unless the same extent of country should be ceded by the Cherokees who 
have not emigrated, or at least an extent of country equal to what the emigrants would be entitled to upon an equal 
partition of their lands, according to their relative numbers. 

In arranging the various interests which will have to be considered in the negotiations which you are authorized 
to enter into with the Osages, Quapaws, and Cherokees, the President has implicit confidence in your discretion, 
and in your zeal for the public service. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WILLIAM H. CRAWFORD. 

To William CLAitK, Ninian Edwards, and Augustf, Chouteau, St. Louis, M. T. 



Sir: St. Louis, June 30, 1816. 

We have the honor to inform you that.we are now endeavoring, by all the means in our power, to effectuate 
the objects authorized by your instructions of the 27th ultimo, in relation to the Cherokees and Osages. The principal 
cause of hostility between those tribes is, that the latter suppose the former to have settled upon their lands; which, 
indeed, would appear to be the case, if any published map that we have seen is to be relied upon. This is, 
however, generally thought to be a matter of considerable doubt and uncertainty; and General Rector, (the public 
surveyor for this and the Illinois Territory,) judging from lines which he has heretofore caused to be run, entertains 
a different opinion. It is evident, therefore, that no satisfactory adjustment can take place until the fact in con- 
troversy can be ascertained by running the line of the Osage purchase from the Missouri to the Arkansas. For 
this purpose we have made application to General Rector, who has promised to have the line run as soon as the 
Osages can be notified to attend, agreeably lo the treaty between them and the United States. He, however, 
having no instructions upon the subject, and knowing that that line could not be run for the price usually allowed for 
surve^'ing, would not undertake it without our previously agreeing to be eventually responsible for all necessary ex- 
penses, and an adequate compensation to the gentleman to be employed. We, therefore, hope that such instructions 
and authority may be given to him as has been usual heretofore in similar cases. Our former suggestion, that an 
alteration in the line of the Osage cession might be expedient, was made under the impression that the settlements 
of the Cherokees might be found to be on the Osage lands; and as their improvements are considerable and really 
valuable, and have been made upon land pointed out to them by a public agent of the Government, we thought it 
would be just to make such a purchase, if it should be found to be necessary, as would include their settlements; 
but if this measure (supposing those Indians to be actually on the land of the Osages) should not be deemed advisa- 
ble by the President, it will then be a question for his consideration whether good faith does not require that the 
Government, with whose apparent approbation they settled, should take immediate measures for their removal 
from the lands of the Osages, and, in that event, whether some compensation ought not to be made them for the 
losses they would thereby sustain. The Quapaws are said to claim the lands on the south side of the Arkansas, 
including a part of the Cherokee settlements; and have the same dispute with the Cherokees on that side which 
the Osages are supposed to have on the north side. As your letter seems to forbid any purchases of lands from 
the Indians which ar<! not required for settlement, we should be happy to receive the President's instructions upon 
the above-mentioned cases as early as possible. 

Referring to your letter of the 7th ultimo, we beg leave respectfully to suggest it as our opinion that you are 
mistaken in supposing that any part of the Illinois purchase lies within the Indiana Territory, and that the quantity 
of land contained in that cession, " which lies north of the northern line of the State of Ohio, extending westwardly to 
the Mississippi river, "will fall greatly short of your expectations, as will appear by Governor Edwards's map, which we 
understand has been transmitted lo you, and which we think more correct than any other that has been made of 
that country. Wo have thought it our duty to make these suggestions from a belief that our instructions, in part, 
have been predicated upon a misapprehension; of which it is best, at all events, that you should be informed. We 
shall, however, use our best endeavors to execute the President's wishes upon the subject. 
We have the honor to be, most respectfully, sir, your most obedient servants, 

WILLIAM CLARK, 
NINIAN EDWARDS, 

The Hon. Secretary op War. AUG. CHOUTEAU. 



Gentlemen: Department op War, August 13, 1816. 

Your communication of the 5th of July has been submitted to the President, and I am instructed to inform 
you that you are authorized to accept of the property which has been delivered up by the Sacs of Rock river 
as a fulfilment on their part of those stipulations of the treaty relative to the delivery of property. 

I have the honor to be, &.C. 

GEORGE GRAHAM, Chief Clerk. 
Messrs. Clark, Edwards, and Chouteau, Commissioners, ^'C, St. Louis. 



Gentlemen: Department of War, September 17, 1816. 

Your letter of the 30th of June last has been received and submitted to the consideration of the President. 

It is expedient, in every point of view, that the line of the Osage purchase should be run and marked from the 
Missouri to the Arkansas. You are hereby authorized to engage lo pay such extra expenses for running that line as 
shall appear to you to be reasonable and just, limiting the same by a maximum which shall not be exceeded in any 
event. The importance of accomplishing this service without delay renders it necessary that your engagements 
should be definitive, without consulting the Department upon the maximum to be determined. Economy ought to be 
strictly adhered to, which is too frequently departed from in every transaction in which the Government is concerned. 

Upon the subject of an eventual cession from the Osages or Quapaws becoming necessary to secure the Chero- 
kee emigrants in their possessions, no precise instructions can be given. Those settlements were made upon an 
understanding which has never been fulfilled, or even acknowledged, by the Cherokee nation since that period. 
On the contrary, when urged upon that point last winter, they rejected the idea of exchange of lands in considera- 
tion for those upon which their emigrant brethren had settled, and said that they should be compelled to return and 



1816.] TREATIESWITHTHIRTEENTRIBES. 99 

live with the nation. They even refused to consider them as entitled to any part of the annuities payable to the 
Cherokees. 

This subject has been referred to the commissioners now holding a treaty in the Chickasaw nation with the 
four southern tribes. Should the condition upon which the settlements upon the Arkansas were founded be recog- 
nised by the nation, it will then become the duty of the United States to provide permanently for those emigrants 
by securing them in the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions. Should the nation, however, persevere in the 
sentiments by which their deputation was animated last winter, all obligation on the part of the United States is 
extinguished. To their own nation they must look for indemnity for any losses which they may sustain in conse- 
quence of their emigration. The United States canuot be bound if the conditions on the other part are violated. 
The result of the pending negotiation will remove all doubt on the subject, either by releasing us from all obliga- 
tions, or by defining the extent of the duties imposed upon us in relation to the settlers upon the Arkansas. 

It is very probable that the Illinois cession may not extend eastwardly as far as the Indiana line, but it is so laid 
down in our maps. It is highly probable that Governor Edwards's map of the Illinois Territory may be more cor- 
rect than those in our possession, especially in the delineation of the lower part of the river of that name; but there 
is reason to believe that even that map does not afford materials sufficiently accurate to form any conclusive opinion 
upon as to the extent of the cession either eastwardly or northwardly. If that cession can be extended to the 
southern or western margin of Lake Michigan, by relinquishing that which lies north of the northern line of Ohio, 
reserving certain military sites, there can be no doubt of the utility of such an exchange. The views of the Presi- 
dent on this subject have undergone no change. If Governor Edwards's map is accurate as to the mouth of Fox 
river, there will be but little probability of extending the cession to the shores of the Michigan, in consideration of 
the relinquishment of our title to the northern extremity of the Illinois purchase. If this should be found impracti- 
cable, any exchange which will tend to render our acquisitions in that quarter more compact, and at the same time 
bring us nearer the lake shore, will be acceptable to the President. The determination to purchase land only when 
demanded for settlement will form the settled policy of the Government. Experience has sufficiently proven that 
our population will spread over any cession, however extensive, before it can be brought into market, and before 
there is any regular and steady demand for settlement; thereby increasing the difficulty of protection, embarrassing 
the Government by broils with the natives, and rendering the execution of the laws regulating intercourse with the 
Indian tribes utterly impracticable. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

General William Clark, 

Governor N. Edwards, and 

AuGUSTE Chouteau, Esq. 

Commissioners, ^c, St. Louis. 



Sir: Washington City, April 17, 1816. 

The undersigned consider it their duty to draw the attention of the Executive to the situation of the State 
of Tennessee, which they have the honor to represent, in regard to the Indian claim still existing to lands within its 
chartered limits. 

The western section of the State, embracing its whole width from north to south, and from the Mississippi to 
the Tennessee river, and towards the southern part of the State across the latter river to the river Elk, containing 
about eight millions of acres, is claimed by the Chickasaw Indians; none of whom, it is believed, reside thereon, and 
few, if any, use it even as hunting grounds, as the game is understood to be chiefly destroyed. A great portion of this 
tract was granted by the State of North Carolina to individuals more than tweniy-five years ago, whose rights are 
guarantied to the holders by the act of cession made by that State of the territory now composing the State of 
Tennessee to the United States. 

The undersigned forbear to dwell on the great inconvenience and loss which individual claimants experience by 
being deprived of the use and benefit of their lands for so many years, as well as the risk they run of losing them 
entirely on account of not being able to identify their boundaries, by reason of the landmarks being destroyed by 
time and accidents. 

The southeastern section of the State, extending across the Tennessee river, and reaching to the heart of the 
present settlements, containing nearly four millions of acres, a part of which has also been granted to individuals in 
the manner above stated, is claimed by the Cherokees, few of whom reside thereon, especially north of the Ten- 
nessee river, and the game is said to be so destro3'ed as to be of little or no value. 

Thus circumstanced, nearly half her territory incumbered with Indian claims, and excluded from settlement, 
the State of Tennessee has looked with anxiety, but at the same time with confidence, to the National Government, 
in the expectation that it would in due time adopt the requisite measures to efl'ect the extinction of those claims, 
and thereby give expansion to her settlements, as well as enable individuals to get possession of their just rights. 
During a state of war with a powerful enemy, when the undivided resources of the nation as well as the attention 
of the Government might be required to vindicate her rights and avenge her wrongs, Tennessee forbore to press her 
claims on this head; but, on the return of peace, the restoration of our afl'airs to their usual tranquillity, and of our 
finances to a flourishing condition, she feels herself authorized to bring the subject to the immediate view of the 
General Government, that it may receive the consideration to which it is conceived to be justly entitled. 

The undersigned, therefore, entertain the hope that, for the purpose of efi'ecting the extinction of those Indian 
claims, (an object so much desired by the State they represent,) it may accord with the Executive views of propriety 
to direct such treaty or treaties to be held with the Chickasaw and Cherokee nations of Indians as the occasion 
may require, and at such times and places as may be considered most convenient to the parties concerned. 
The undersigned have the honor, &c. 

G. W. CAMPBELL, 
JOHN WILLIAMS, 
S. POWER, 
B. H. HENDERSON, 
N. CANNON, 
J. THOMAS, 
W. G. BLOUNT, 
J. B. REYNOLDS. 
James Madison, Esq., President of the United States. 



100 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 144. 

Sir: Department op War, June 4, 1816. 

The uncertainly of the boundaries of the Creek cession to the west has rendered it necessary to hold treaties 
with the Choctaw and Cliickasaw nations for the adjustment of the dividing line between tiie United States and 
those tribes. For this purpose, General John Coffee, John Rhea, and John McKee, esquires, have been authorized 
to negotiate with the former of those tribes. 

To effect the same object with the Chickasaws, the President has appointed General Andrew Jackson, the 
honorable Jesse Franklin, of North Carolina, and yourself. 

By the next mail you will receive more precise instructions upon the measures preparatory to the opening of 
the negotiation, and, in due time, those which shall regulate your conduct in eflfecting the object confided to your 
management. I have the honor to be, &c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

General David Merivtether, Athens, Georgia. 



Sir: Department of War, July 1, 1816. 

Lest any mistake should be committed in relation to the point called the Flat or Shining Rock in the Chero- 
kee and other Indian treaties, it is proper to inform you that it is on Bear creek; and this is the corner of the 
Chickasaw possessions, according to the evidence produced by that nation. From this point their line, according 
to the same evidence, runs to the Long Leaf Pine, which falls into the Black Warrior. 

I have the honor to be, <&c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 
William Barnett, Huntsville, Mississippi Territory. 



Gentlemen: Department op War, July 5, [3,] 1816. 

The diffidulty of satisfactorily arranging with the Chickasaw deputation, during their visit to Washington, the 
western boundary of the cession made by the Creek Indians to the United States in 1814, arising as well from the 
nature of the evidence produced, as from the uncertainty always found in the definition of Indian boundaries, has 
induced the President to determine upon holding a treaty for the purpose of definitively settling all territorial con- 
troversies with that nation. 

To this course the President has the more readily inclined, from the consideration that the powers of the depu- 
tation, though ample for the particular object contemplated, were, so far as the question of territory was concerned, 
specially limited to the settlement of boundary according to existing rights. In treating directly with the nation, 
whose power is unlimited, the question of boundary may be equitably arranged by mutual concessions of the lands 
in controversy, or by the relinquishment of all claims by the one party for a consideration to be paid by the other, 
proportioned to the extent of the country in dispute, and to the nature of the evidence by which the title is sup- 
ported. The evidence in the present case, depending wholly upon tradition, unconnected with records, or charts, 
or marked lines, cannot be expected to convince either of the parties of the nullity of their respective titles. From 
this view of the subject, it is manifest that the controversy can be adjusted only by a spirit of conciliation and com- 
promise, or by an appeal to force. Justice and sound policy equally forbid that this appeal should be made or pro- 
voked by the United States. The consideration that the weakness of one of the parties may insure submission to 
whatever decision shall be made, without regard to its correctness, so far from releasing the other from the obliga- 
tions of justice, makes a forcible appeal to its magnanimity, which cannot be disregarded without loss of national 
character. 

This consideration, however, does not require that the just rights and true interests of the nation should be im- 
paired, much less sacrificed. The great value of the possessions of this tribe, compared with the smallness of its 
population, and the manifest interest which it has to increase its annuity by the sale of a part of its lands, will jus- 
tify the Government in pressing the claim which it derives from the Creek cession, with the view to obtain the 
relinquishment of their claim to the lands in dispute for a fair consideration. It is believed that the true interests 
Of both parties will be promoted by the adoption of this policy. 

The President expects that the negotiation confided to your discretion will be conducted upon these principles. 
In conformity with this view of the subject, your efforts will be at first directed to obtain the relinquishment of the 
Chickasaw title to the lands claimed by them, which are understood to be comprehended within a line running 
from the Flat or Shining Rock, on Bear creek, to the ridge dividing the waters which fall into the Black Warrior 
from those of the Tombigbec river; thence, along the ridge, to a point due east of the mouth of Tibby creek; thence, 
directly to the mouth of that creek; thence, up the Tombigbec river, to the Cotton Gin Port; thence, along the line 
run by General Coffee, to its intersection of the Cherokee line defined by the late treaty. The importance of the 
territory comprehended within these limits is not to be estimated by the intrinsic value of the lands. The title to 
the territory in question gives us the undisputed navigation of the Tombigbee river to the Cotton Gin Port, which 
is the highest point of unobstructed navigation upon that river; it being expected that the negotiations set on foot 
with the Choctaw nation will terminate in the acknowledgment of the Tombigbee river as the boundary between 
that tribe and the United States. Considering the importance of the navigation of this river, in every point of view, 
no consideration which it may be necessary to give will be considered exorbitant which does not very far exceed 
the rate at which purchases of Indian lands have been heretofore made. Should it be found necessary to give a 
very unusual price, the reason for giving it should be fully explained, in order to preclude the expectation that like 
prices will be given hereafter for lands differently situated. Should you succeed in obtaining this relinquishment, 
various other objects will demand your attention. The agent of the Cherokee nation has been directed to renew 
to that tribe the offer made to their deputation last winter, to purchcise their claim to the lands lying west of the 
Chickasaw old fields, and which are also claimed by the Chickasaws. He has also been directed to efiect the pur- 
chase of all the Cherokee lands lying north of the Tennessee river, if the nation is disposed to make the sale. 
Should these offers be rejected, he has been directed to urge the nation to give to the deputation which shall be 
sent to the Chickasaw treaty full power to treat upon these subjects. In either event, you are required to make 
every proper exertion to obtain from them, jointly or severally, as the circumstances may require, the cession of 
this district of country. The difficulty of settling the conflicting claims of these two tribes will probably facilitate 
the execution of the first part of the duty here enjoined. The little value of the Cherokee lands lying north of the 
Tennessee river will probably render the second part more easy. As these cessions will connect the settlements of 
Tennessee with those upon the Gulf of Mexico, and as this connexion is considered an object of great importance 
to the general interests, you will, in fixing the price, be governed by the rules prescribed in the preceding case. 
Should your efforts in this respect be unsuccessful, or should the Clierokees not only have refused the offers di- 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 101 

rected to be made by the agent, but also have refused to invest their deputation with the necessary authority upon 
these subjects, you will endeavor to obtain, by convention, the free navigation of Bear creek, with an authority to 
construct a road from the highest navigable point upon that stream to the Cotton Gin Port, on the Tombigbee 
river, and also such other roads as your knowledge of the localities of the country shall induce you to think neces- 
sary. Perhaps the best mode of disposing of this subject will be to provide, generally, for the opening of such 
roads through that part of the Indian country as the President shall, from time to time, judge necessary. The toll 
to be received at the ferries or bridges to be established, not only upon these roads, but upon those already in use, 
should be regulated by treaty, in order the more efiectually to guard against unjust exactions, and the vexatious dis- 
putes which necessarily result from them. 

The extinguishment of the Chickasaw title to the lands lying in the Great Bend of the Tennessee river has long 
been an object of desire to the inhabitants of the western parts of Tennessee and Kentucky. The fertility of the 
soil, and the excellent navigation which that river aflbrds from the foot of the Muscle Shoals to its junction with 
the Ohio, render the acquisition of this tract of country of great importance to the United States. The advan- 
tages of a natural boundary such as the Tennessee river should not be entirely overlooked by either of the parlies. 
Under this view of the subject, the President has determined that an eflbrt shall be made to obtain from the Chick- 
asaw nation the cession of this valuable body of land. The consideration to be given for this cession is submitted 
to your discretion, with the single observation, that, as the inducements to make this purchase are believed to be 
inferior to those which operate in the case of the lands lying between the Tennessee river and the Creek cession, 
it is expected that the price of the latter will be lower than the former, the comparative extent and value of the 
tracts being kept in view. 

It is probable that you will not be able to accomplish all these objects at the approaching negotiation. The 
extent and value of the cessions which you are directed to obtain, if practicable, so far exceed those which have 
been heretofore made by that nation, that there is some reason to apprehend that the feelings of the chiefs may be 
shocked at the policy which these demands may be supposed to disclose. Under these circumstances, it is with 
some degree of reluctance that the President feels it necessary to direct that propositions be made to them for the 
purchase of that part of their hunting grounds lying within the State of Kentucky. Respect to the feelings of that 
State, manifested by their Senators and Representatives in an application for that purpose,requires that an effort should 
be made to accomplish their wishes, unless the disposition of the nation should be discovered to be so adverse to it 
as to render it, in your opinion, injudicious to urge the subject. If the cession shall be obtained, the purchase money 
will have to be paid by the State of Kentucky. The validity of the treaty will, therefore, depend upon its ratifica- 
tion by that State. 

If, in the progress of your negotiations, it shall be discovered that any one of the cessions directed to be obtained 
can be more easily effected than another, you are authorized to change the order in which they are to be pressed, 
except the cessions lying south of the Tennessee river. It is possible that the cession of the lands lying in the 
State of Kentucky may be more easily obtained than that of the lands in the Bend of Tennessee, as those lands 
are more distant from the Chickasaw settlements. The same consideration may possibly induce that nation to cede 
a tract of country lying immediately south of the Kentucky line, and extending from the settlements to the Missis- 
sippi river, in lieu of the lands lying in the Bend of the Tennessee. If the Cherokees cede their lands lying north of 
the Tennessee, a part of the consideration will have to be paid by the State of Tennessee. It is expedient that the 
proportion be fixed by the treaty, which will be valid only upon the ratification by the United States and by the 
State of Tennessee. Your knowledge of the relative value of the lands belonging to the parties will enable you to 
apportion the consideration to be paid equitably between them. 

Although the cessions which you are required to obtain, if practicable, excite well-founded apprehensions that 
the views of the Government will not be full}" realized, yet there are many considerations which, when properly 
understood and duly appreciated, forcibly unite in recommending, on the part of the Chickasaws, an acquiescence 
in the demands which you are required to press. Their deputation, in their recent visit to this place, have requested 
that English schools may be established among them, for the purpose of more effectually introducing the arts of 
civilized life, and of forming the habits necessary to that state of being. They all united in ascribing the little pro- 
gress which had been made by them in the arts of husbandry to their incapacity to obtain ploughs, and the other 
necessary instruments and utensils. A cession of a considerable portion of their unoccupied lands, while on the one 
hand it will attest the sincerity of their desire, will, on the other, tend to hasten the accomplishment of that desi- 
rable object. On the one hand, it will diminish the temptation to waste in the chase the time which could be 
more profitably employed in husbandry, and, on the other, furnish the means of prosecuting their agricultural labors 
with the greatest success. Blessed with a fertile soil, a mild and salubrious climate, and supplied with the necessary 
implements of husbandry, a slight degree of labor will be sufficient to procure them not only the necessaries but the 
comforts of life. Ease and comfort cannot fail to produce a considerable increase in their population, and rapidly 
destroy all reliance for subsistence upon the chase. Until the propensity for the chase be checked, until the enterprise 
of the nation receive a different direction, great and beneficial changes in their situation cannot be expected. Their 
chiefs are capable of understanding this reasoning. If they are sincere in the desires which they have expressed, 
of aspiring to the honorable character of American citizens, they will use their influence with the nation to make 
the cessions required of them. 

If the cessions are obtained, the payment of the consideration should be regulated by the progressive improve- 
ments contemplated to result from the receipt of annuities sufficient to supply them not only with all the utensils of 
agriculture, but with man3'of the comforts of civilized life. At present, they are poor and destitute of almost every 
thing necessary to render them comfortable. Their immediate wants may be supplied in the form of presents, 
whilst their future necessities will be regularly supplied by the payment of a yearly stipend. In determining the 
amount of this stipend, the compensation for each cession may be put in the form of an annuity, decreasing every 
ten or five years, in the proportion of ten, eight, six, four, and three, and to cease altogether at the end of fifty 
years, when it may be presumed civilized habits will have rendered this resource unnecessary. Should a longer term 
be absolutely insisted on, the lowest annuity may be protracted; but it is extremely desirable to avoid a perpetuity, 
unless it be essential to the accomplishment of the main object. 

If, contrary to this well-founded expectation, the tribe, instead of advancing in the arts of civilization, should 
retrograde, and dwindle in its population, the diminished rate of its annuity will probably continue to bear nearly the 
same proportion to its wants as when first stipulated. In every point of view, therefore, it is desirable that the 
annuity agreed upon should be greatest during the first years of its enjoyment, and that it should gradually diminish 
to a small amount, if not entirely cease, at a given period of time. This system will be favorable to the extinguish- 
ment of their title to such portion of their unsettled lands as may become indispensable to the United States in 
the progress of their population. 

In the management of the various and delicate interests involved in the negotiation confided to your discretion 
and talents, the President places the most unbounded reliance. A variety of considerations and arguments, which 



102 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 144. 

it is impossible to embrace in these instructions, will necessarily arise from the discussions in which you will be 
engaged, which, judiciously wielded, will enable you to remove the objections urged by ihe nation, and secure a 
compliance with the views of the Government. 

Your authority to make presents pending the negotiation, and after its termination, is limited only by your dis- 
cretion, subject to the rules laid down in relation to the consideration to be given for each particular cession. 

After having secured as many of the objects confided to your care in this negotiation as can be obtained with- 
out exciting the jealousy or alarming the fears of the nation, you are required to use your best endeavors to settle 
in an amicable manner all disputes between the Indian tribes represented in the negotiation, relative to their 
respective boundaries. If it is believed by you to be expedient that the boundaries to be settled should be marked 
under the authority of the United States, provision to that effect may be made in the convention whicli you are 
authorized to make upon that subject, if it be not objected to on the part of the Indians. In the event of a stipula- 
tion of this nature, one or more of the topographical engineers will be employed, according to the circumstances 
of the case. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WILLIAM H. CRAWFORD. 

Major General Andrew Jackson, 

General David Meriwether, and 

Jesse Franklin, Esq. 



Gentlemen: Department of War, July 5, 1816. 

On the od instant I had the honor to forward to Nashville the instructions for the government of your con- 
duct in the negotiation upon which you are required to enter with the Chickasaw nation, and with such deputation 
as may be sent for that purpose by the Cherokees. 

The views of the President having been fully developed in these instructions, I have but little to add in this 
letter. It is expected that your conduct will be conciliatory, and calculated to inspire the nation with a just sense 
of the equity and magnanimity of the conduct of the Government towards them. 

From the extensive powers with which you are vested, the most beneficial consequences are anticipated; the 
wants of the Indians, and the conflicting claims of the Chickasaws and Cherokees, cannot fail to facilitate the ac- 
complishment of the first two objects of your instructions. Should the others fail, although it will be the subject of 
regret, yet the interests of the nation will not be sensibly affected by it. 

In relation to these questions, you will press or relax your efforts to secure any one of them a preference to 
another, according to the dispositions manifested by the Indians. 

It is impossible to decide, before the experiment is made, whether they will be more disposed to cede the lands 
in the Bend of Tennessee in preference to the northern extremity of their possessions. It is necessary to observe 
that the claim of the Cherokees to the lands lying in the Bend of Tennessee have been relinquished to the United 
States. 

The treaty of the 28th of November, 1785, held by Benjamin Hawkins, Andrew Pickens, James Martin, and 
Lachlan Mcintosh, recognises the Cherokee claim to those lands; and the treaty held a few months afterwards by 
the same commissioners with the Chickasaws does not exclude them in the definition of Chickasaw boundary. 
The letters patent, signed by General Washington, then President, in the year 1794, is the first recognition of their 
title to the lands in question. It is presumed that you will be able to procure copies of those treaties; if not, they 
will be forwarded to you. 

Enclosed is evidence furnished by the Chickasaw nation, which shows that the Flat or Shining Rock referred to in 
some of our Indian treaties, and which is one of their corners, is a point different from the Long Leaf Pine, and that 
it runs from the one to the other. 

The Chickasaw deputation have complained of their want of confidence in Colonel Cocke, the present agent, 
and have requested that another might be sent to them. There is some reason to doubt whether the deputation 
have correctly represented the will of the nation in this case. The President is desirous of ascertaining the truth, 
and has directed me to instruct you to inquire into the fact before you close the negotiations. It is desirable that 
this part of your duty should be executed with a proper regard to the feelings of Colonel Cocke. It is necessary 
that the agent should possess the confidence of the nation; if he has lost it, the public interest requires that another 
agent should be selected. In this measure, the reputation of the preceding agent will not be involved, as the inquiry 
as simply to ascertain whether he possesses the confidence of the nation in a sufficient degree to be useful to the 
(Government. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

Major Gen. Andrew Jackson, 

General David Meriwether, and 

Jesse Franklin, Esq. 



Sir: ' Department of Wxr, July 5, 1816. 

Since my letter of the 24th of May, it has been determined to make a more strenuous effort to obtain the 
Sands lying between the Cherokee line and the Tennessee river, both from the Chickasaws and Cherokees, than 
was at that time contemplated. 

In consequence of this determination, you are authorized to suspend the removal of the settlers upon those lands 
until the result of the negotiation with the Chickasaws shall be known. This delay will at least give them time to 
make their crops, and provide for the next year's subsistence. 

I have the honor to be, &.c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 
Major Gen. Andrew Jackson, Nashville, Tennessee. 



Friend and Brother: Chickasaw Agency, July 17, 1816. 

I yesterday received your letter, dated at Nashville, July 7lh, and am. very glad to hear of your return 
from the Seminoles, but am sorry to find that you were in bad. health. You inform me that you have been appointed 
by our father the President of the United States to act as a commissioner to treat with the Chickasaw nation for 
the purchase or exchange of land; in answer to which I beg leave to inform you that, at a council held at my house 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 103 

on the 13th instant, the subject of selling or exchanging land was discussed, and it was determined by the chiefs 
then present that the Chickasaw nation had no lands to sell or exchange whatever. I have also to slate that the 
warriors of this nation have been very much dissatisfied with the chiefs ever since the treaty held with you in 1816, 
on account of the land then sold by them. The Chickasaw nation will, however, be very happy to meet you, and 
to hear what you have to say to them, at whatever time you may think proper to appoint; but the chiefs would wish 
the place of meeting to be somewhere in the centre of the nation, as the warriors would not like any treaty to be 
held on the frontier. Respecting the time appointed by you for my coming to see you at the mouth of Cypress, I 
am sorry to say that the time is too short, as I am this day to set out on a journey to the Choctaw nation, where I 
shall be five or six days, for the purpose of settling our boundary line with the Choctaws. I would rather you 
would fix the time of meeting for the 5th of August, (if convenient to you,) when I shall be at the moulh of Cypress, 
and I expect some of the headmen will be there too, as I shall invite them to go with me; we can there arrange the 
time and place for holding the treaty with the nation. 

In answer to what you say relative to the money due the nation as stipulated by the treaty, I have to inform you 
it has not been received, and the nation are daily looking anxiously for it. We have been told that, upon the 
return of Col. Butler, the money will be immediately paid us through the hands of our agent. Col. Henry Sher- 
burne, wlio is now with us. 1 have now only to express my best wishes, «fcc. 

JAMES COLBERT, 

Major Gen. Andrew Jackson. United States Interpreter. 

Sir: Head-quarters, Division of the South, Nashville, Jult/ 19, 1816. 

Your letter of the 5th instant, and the instructions of the same date which are to govern the commissioners 
in the treaty ordered to be held with the Chickasaws, are this moment received. I have, by express, ordered 
Captain Allen to suspend the order of the 27th of May, for the removal of the intruders and destruction of their 
improvements, until further ordered. 

The instructions to the commissioners are ample, and I have a sanguine hope that the Cherokees, under pres- 
ent circumstances, will yield, for a moderate compensation, all claim to the lands south of the Tennessee, so 
important for national defence and the protection of our frontier. 

I have very little doubt but the Chickasaws will also feel it their interest and policy to surrender all claim to the 
lands south of the Tennessee included within the lines run by General Coffee, for a very moderate sum; hosvever, 
as far as my exertions and influence can be useful, they will be employed to obtain this all-important object. 
I suppose the agent for the Chickasaws has been instructed to convene the chiefs on the 1st of September, and to 
lay in supplies for them during the convention. I take this for granted, as there is nothing said on this subject by 
you. I also presume that a secretary is to be allowed to the commissioners, with the usual salary. 

I am, &c. 

ANDREW JACKSON. 

Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



Sir: Head-quarters, Division of the South, Nashville, July 20, 1816. 

From a full consideration of the instructions by which we are to be governed in holding the treaty ordered 
with the Chickasaws, it may be necessary, in the course of the negotiation, to make the chiefs some presents; it 
is therefore necessary to be advised from what source they are to be drawn, and also out of what fund the con- 
tingent expenses are to be paid, and by whom the necessary supplies for the commission are to be furnished. 

With respect, &c. 

ANDREW JACKSON, Major General, 
Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. Commanding Division of the South. 



Sir: Department of War, August 5, 1816. 

Your letters of the 19th and 20th ultimo are received. Mr. Franklin will probably be with you before the 
receipt of this. From General Meriwether we have received no answer to the several conmiunications that have 
been made to him. Mr. Cocke, the Chickasaw agent, was advised on the 26th of June that tiie commissioners 
would meet at the Chickasaw council-house on the 1st of September; and Major Colbert, who was then here, in- 
formed us that abundant supplies of provisions could be furnished by the nation. I shall write to Mr. Cocke, who 
will be charged with procuring the supplies of provisions, by this mail. As it was doubtful whether goods at this 
season could be transported in time for the treaty, none were ordered. The commissioners are authorized to draw 
on this Department for such sinus as may be found necessary, either on account of contingent expenses, or on ac- 
count of such presents as they may think proper to make to the chiefs. Some particular articles might be procured 
at Nashville, but I suspect that money would generally have more influence among those Indians than goods. 

The commissioners will appoint their own secretary, who will be allowed five dollars a day, exclusive of his 
necessary expenses. 

A regular commission will be forwarded to you this week; it has been delayed as well on account of the uncer- 
tainty of your acceptance, as from an expectation of hearing by every mail from General Meriwether. Should he 
not accept, Mr. F. Sharp, of Kentucky, will be appointed to fill the vacancy. No delay, however, will be occasioned 
by such a change, as the commissioners are authorized to act jointly or severally. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

GEORGE GRAHAM, Chief Clerk. 

Gen. Andrew Jackson. 



Gentlemen: Department op War, September 10, 1816. 

Enclosed you will receive an extract of a letter from the agent of the United States in the Cherokee nation, 
from which it is conjectured you will receive some aid in accomplishing the objects of your mission. It is presumed 
that Colonel Meigs has furnished you with the information which it contains, as it will necessarily have some influence 
upon the negotiations with which you are charged. 

The commissioners for running the lines of the Creek cession have represented that the Chickasaw nation have 
remonstrated against the running and marking of the line designated in the Cherokee convention as infringing upon 
their rights. 



104 I N D I A N A F F A I R S. [No. 144. 

Although it is manifest tliat they have no interest in the matter, as the Cherokee claim to the lands north of that 
line will not receive any additional force from that event, nor the Chickasaw claim to the south of it be in any degree 
weakened, yet, as the negotiations with which you are charged may make the running of a part of that line unne- 
cessary', they have been directed to postpone their operations until the result of your efforts shall be known. They 
have also been instructed to run and mark any line connected with the Creek purchase which may be made neces- 
sary by the treaty or treaties which you may conclude, without waiting for further directions from this Department. 
To enable them to fulfil this duty with the least possible delay, you are required to furnish them with a definition of 
llie lines which it shall be their duty to run pursuant to their instructions. 

It will be proper to stipulate for the attendance of Indian commissioners for the purpose of marking the lines, 
and that immediately after the termination of the negotiations. 

I have the honor to be, &.c. 

General A. Jackson, WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

General D. Meriwether, and 

J. Franklin, Esq., 

Commissioners, S^c, Chickasaw Agency. 



Gentlemen: Department op War, September 10, 1816. 

Your communication of the 13th ultimo, covering the address of the Chickasaw nation remonstrating against 
running the line designated by the Cherokee treaty, has been received. 

Although it is not conceived that the running of that line can in any degree affect the claims of that nation, what- 
ever they may be, yet, as it is probable that the result of the negotiations now pending in the Chickasaw nation may 
change the line in question, there is no urgent necessity for completing it at this time. Should these negotiations termi- 
nate without effecting that line, you, or either of you, will proceed to run and mark the line without further delay. Should 
the commissioners succeed in obtaining the cessions which they are instructed to demand, you will, upon due notifi- 
cation thereof, run such lines south of the Tennessee as are in any degree connected with the Creek cession, as may 
be defined in the treaty or treaties which may be formed by them. They will be instructed to furnish you with the 
definition of the lines which you are to run, with the least possible delay. Perhaps your attendance at the place of 
negotiation may be useful, especially as it will prevent the loss of time in receiving the information necessary for the 
government of your conduct, and may secure a prompt attendance on the part of the tribes concerned at the running 
of the lines. 

What is the distance to the Flat Rock recognised by the Cherokees? What the probable course of the line from 
the Ten Islands to that point? Any information on any subject connected with this line, the nature of the soil, and 
face of the country through which it will run, will be acceptable. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

P. S. The authority to run these lines contemplated in the foregoing letter is to be understood as joint or several, 
for the purpose of avoiding unnecessary delay. 

W. H. C. 
Wm. Barnett, Esq. and General John Coffee, 

Commissioners for running the line of the Creek cession. 



Gentlemen: Department op War, September 12, 1816. 

The extracts mentioned in the postscript to my letter of the 11th instant, not being prepared at the closing 
of the mail, are now forwarded, together with an extract from a letter from this Department, under date of the 27th 
May, 1816, to the commissioners to whom the complaints of the Cherokees on the Arkansas have been referred. 
The bearing of these papers upon the negotiations in which you are engaged is so obvious as to require no explanation 
from me. 

Should an arrangement be made, founded upon the principle of exchange as contemplated by Mr. Jefferson and 
the Cherokee emigrants, a cession adjoining the settlements of Georgia may possibly be obtained. A part of the 
lands ceded by the Cherokees to the State of Georgia in the treaty of 1783 was relinquished by the treaty of 1790; 
a considerable portion of which has never been receded, and none of it regularly. That part, at least, ought to be 
receded; and, if the cession could be extended to the Chattahoochie, it would not be more than what the State had 
a right to expect. This, however, is mentioned rather as what is expected than what is attainable. General Meri- 
wether, one of the commissioners, is fully acquainted with all the circumstances, and will give the explanations 
which may be necessary, should there be a prospect of obtaining a cession. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 
To Andrew Jackson, WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

David Meriwether, and 
Jesse Franklin, 

Commissioners, Sj-c. 



Sir: Chickasaw Council-house, September 20, 1816. 

In a communication to you of the 4th instant from Generals Jackson and Meriwether, you were advised of the 
Big Warrior's having sent a runner to this nation, excusing himself and the chiefs of the Creek nation from attend- 
ing at this convention, but inviting the four southern tribes to assemble at Turkeytown on the 1st of October next. 

It was stated that this was believed to be, in combination with the Cherokees, to defeat the objects of this con- 
ference; and that, to counteract it, George Mayfield, accompanied b}- a Creek chief, had been sent on a second 
mission to the Creek nation, to invite their attendance, and bring on, if possible, the upper chiefs of said nation. 

The Cherokee delegates arrived here on the 6th instant, and on the 8th Generals Jackson and Meriwether held 
a conference with the chiefs of the Chickasaws, Cherokees, and Choctaws, for the substance of which, as well as 
the proceedings of the subsequent meetings, j'ou are respectfully referred to the journal that will be forwarded you. 
As was anticipated, much difficulty was encountered in negotiating with the Chickasaws; the conference being held 
with the whole nation, every individual had to be consulted; and the chiefs, together with the agent, seemed more 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 105 

anxious to maintain thfiir popularity, than to promote tiie views of Government, or tiie best interests of tiie nation 
they ruled. Much embarrassment was occasioned by j'our letter of the 16th of April lo the agent having been read 
to the Chickasaws previous to the arrival of the commissioners, and the interpretation given it. The charter from 
General Washington was supposed unobjectionable, and an idea prevailed that it would he supported in preference 
to any other title. Generals Jackson and Meriwether, the two commissioners present, (Jesse Franklin, Esq. not 
having arrived,) believing that no Creek title to territory actually occupied and settled could be impaired by any 
charter to which the Creeks did not give their assent, deemed it an act of justice and sound policy, and absolutely 
necessary to the correct discharge of the duties assigned them, to examine the testimony on which the conflicting 
claims of the three parlies were founded. They accordingly proceeded to take all the evidence ofl'ered, which has 
been recorded in the journal for your inl'ormation. From that testimony, it appears that the Creeks were the earliest 
settlers of this section of country; that they were found here by the other nations on their lirst arrival; that they 
continued in possession until 1813, when they were driven away by the American troops. It also appears, from 
the declaration of the whole Chickasaw nation, that the Cherokees never had any land adjoining ihem on the south 
side of the Tennessee river, and that the Creeks were always their neighbors; that the Chickasaws never complained 
of Creek encroachments while settled at Cold Water, but permitted the Creeks to remain in pea^-eahle possession 
until destroyed by General Robinson in 1786, but that the moment a settlement was attempted on Bear creek, Pio- 
minsro notifies the intruders to remove, or he will destroy them, and takes part of their goods for rent. (See Gor- 
don's testimony.) It further appears that the Creeks were in possession not only of Cold Water, hut had settlements 
on the Tennessee, a little below Flint, on Tarcliecunda creek, and at Thompson's creek; at Black Warrior, a very 
old town; and at Littleputche, on Caney creek, near Will's creek, the lower boundary of lands stated to have been 
loaned by the Creeks to the Cherokees. From this collective testimony, and a belief that possession is the best, if 
not the only substantial evidence of Indian title, the commissioners then present (Generals Jackson and Meri- 
wether) expressed their conviction of the Creek claim being the strongest, in an address to the council on the ]2tli 
instant, and then made proposals to the Chickasaws and Cherokees, as will be found recorded in the journal. The 
Cherokees, on the 14lh, made a communication in writing, refusing to yield any lands on the north side of the Ten- 
nessee, but pioposirig to cede their claim to the disputed territory on the south for certain considerations, which were 
acceded to, embodied in the form of a treaty, and duly executed and signed by all the commissioners, (the Hon. 
Jesse Franklin having previously arrived.) As the Cherokee delegates seemed doubtful as to the extent of their 
powers, this treaty has been concluded subject to the ratification of the Cherokee nation, and it is provided that the 
said nation shall meet the commissioners on the 28th instant at Turkeytown, to express their approbation or not. 
In concluding the treaty with the Cherokees, it was found both wise and politic to make a few presents to the 
chiefs and interpreters. 

The execution of the treaty with the Cherokees alarmed and seemed to irritate the Chickasaws, and the death 
of a principal chief (the Factor) appeared to distract their councils. Confusion amongst them was visible. When 
solicited for an answer to the propositions made them on the 12th instant, they invariably begged time to deliberate. 
It was soon found that a favorable result to the negotiation was not to be anticipated, unless we addressed ourselves 
feelingly to the predominant and governing passions of all Indian tribes, «'. e. their avarice or fear. Our instructions 
pointed to the former, and forbade the latter; ive therefore were compelled, not from choice, but from instructions, to 
apply the sole remedy in our power. It was applied, and presents offered to the influential chiefs, amounting to 
.$4,500, to be paid on the success of the negotiation. This measure seemed to produce some sensible effect. Time 
was asked for reflection; the chiefs that had left the ground were sent for; and we have this daj' concluded a treaty 
that secures to the West a free and uninterrupted intercourse with the low country. Independent of the accession 
of a rich and large body of lands to the United States, the objects otherwise obtained by this treaty are of incalcu- 
lable political advantage to onr country. We have obtained a connexion of Tennessee with the low country; the 
free use and navigation of the Coosa, Black Warrior, and Tombigbeo rivers; and, what is truly grateful to the human 
mind, prevented the destruction of many of our red brethren, and possibly a civil war; secured the aflections of the 
population of the South and West to the present administration; and n^stored that confidence that formerly existed 
between the rulers and the people. If the annuity given has been larger than usual, it is not more than proportion- 
ate to the benefits obtained. 

We have drawn upon the Department of War for the amount of those presents distributed to the principal chiefs, 
.Tnd which could not appear on the treaty. Secrecy was enjoined as to the names. Secrecy is necessary, or the 
influence of the chiefs would be destroyed, which has been, and may be useful on a future occasion. The chiefs 
will accompaii}' the drafts, which we have no doubt will be duly honored and paid. 

The land within the State of Tennessee, and ceded by this treaty, being within the congressional district, and 
all the vacant lands beins the property of the United States, we did not conceive it necessary to make any discrimi- 
nation. We did not consider it of any importance, when compared with the value of the cession in a political point 
of view; and we were more particularly urged to the measure from a belief that an adjustment between the United 
States and this State was practicable, and the ratification of the treaty thereby not hazarded by a reference to a 
State Legislature. 

Finding the jealousy of the Chickasaw Indians aroused when we obtained the cessions embraced in the treaty, 
we did not think it prudent to urge them on the other points of onr instructions; we conceived it not prudent, and 
of course did not name it to then). 

Agreeably to our instructions, we put to the council the question whether their agent had the confidence of the 
nation. On this day the question was answered by Tishomingo — that they did not want their present agent, and 
gave this as the full sense of the whole nation. The chiefs have spoken to us this evening to say to you that they 
want an agent sent them from the East, capable of doing justice to their red and white brethren. 

The enclosed petition of James Colbert and Turner Brashears, Indian interpreters, is referred for your con- 
sideration. 

We remain, »fec. 

ANDREW JACKSON, ) 

D. MERIWETHER, \ Commissioners. 

Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. J. FRANKLIN, ) 



To the Commissioners of the Chickasaw and Choctaxc Nations, appointed by the President of the United States 

to treat with the said nations. 
Your petitioners beg leave to state to you the grievances under which we labor, as interpreters of the said nations. 
That, whereas we are daily called on to do business with the agent of our nations by the natives thereof, and are 
constantly more or less crowded with companv, the support of whom is a very considerable tax upon us, the sala- 
14 E 



106 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 144. 

ries whirl) we receive from tiie Government of the United States is not more than sufficient to defra}' this unavoid- 
able expense. We therefore request of the commissioners to take into consideration the aforesaid grievances, and 
to give to the United States a just view of our situation, and to request of the Government to afford to us such further 
allowance as will cover this expense, and thereby enable us to save our present salaries as a support for our fami- 
lies, and a compensation for our loss of time from our homes and attention to business. 

We hope that this request will be deemed just and right b^' the commissioners, and that they will use their in- 
fluence in our favor as far as they may deem proper, which will be thankfully acknowledged by 

Your friends and obedient servants, 

JAMES COLBERT, 
TURNER BRASHEARS. 



Sir: Chickasaw Agency, September 22, 1816. 

The treaty with the Chickasaws has terminated in a manner beneficial to the United States, every way 
highly gratifying to all the good people of the western country, and removes many causes of discontent which 
unjust intrusion had created among the Indians. I assure you I should have been extremely happy to have had it 
in my power to concur with General Jackson in every thing that appertained to my duty as agent for the 
United States, and I willingly indulge the hope ihat neither he nor you will attach blame to me for an honest dif- 
ference in opinions, which only happened as to the time and manner proper for me to impress on the minds of the 
Indians the benefits and advantages that would result to them from the terms offered them by the commissioners of 
the United States. After the propositions were made b}' the commissioners, an admirable letter, written by Colonel 
Meigs to the Chernkees, was publicly read. His advice well became that of a father and a friend. It declared to 
them, in the strongest terms, how much it was their duly and interest to grant to the United States all the country 
the President wanted. I then thought it a proper lime to rise in public council and declare my concurrence with 
every sentiment contained in Colonel Meigs's letter, and, at the same time, to tell the Chickasaws that the doc- 
trine was not new to them, and that their agent had on many occasions made known in their councils that the Pres- 
ident and Secretary of War must be listened to and obeyed by them, for that they never would desire them to do 
any thing but what would be for the benefit of all their children. The commissioners and the whites then withdrew, 
and left the Indians in council, when Major General Jackson, without apprizing me of his desire, observed to me 
that he thought at that time I ought to have pointed out to the Indians the special advantages that would result 
from the terms offered them. I answered him, " Advice, when asked for, was better received, more respected, 
and generally more relied on, than opinion given before sought for." He replied, with a strong verification, "that 
the Indians were then in council, and that they would not ask my advice." I answered him in terms equally posi- 
tive, affirming " that I knew I had the entire confidence of the nation, except Tishomingo and James Colbert, and that 
the council would call on nie for my advice and opinion." While thus in conversation with the general, the coun- 
cil sent Levi Colbert and William McGilvery 1o solicit my attendance for the purpose of asking my advice, which 
offered me a favorable opportunity to deliver what was, and slill is, my real opinion, which was as follows: As 
the commissioners had, from examining all the evidence that had been ofiered for their consideration, declared it to 
be their opinion that the Creek claim was the best and strongest to the land south of Tennessee and east of the 
line run by General Coffee, that it was, therefore, my opinion that interest and prudence united should induce 
the Chickasaws to make the best terms they could respecting that land, and that the land north of the Tennessee 
river had long been a place of contention, and that a liberal price was offered for it; that, if they refused the offer 
made, I did not think it probable they would ever get a better; that accepting the ofier would renew and perpetu- 
ate the good understanding which so happily existed, and that a refusal might by possibility be the means of discord, 
and, finally, some event might happen which would produce a worse slate of things; and, therefore, my opinion and 
advice was decidedly in favor of the policy of accepting the offer, and thereby removing all causes of difference and 
discontent which might grow into disturbances of a more serious nature; that the now President was kind and 
liberal in his offers; that none could tell what would happen in future. I will claim no honor from these senti- 
ments; they embrace the universal opinion. But I do aver, protest, and declare, that the Chickasaws, as a nation, 
have at all times expressed the most sincere friendship for me, and in every council publicly declared their 
unbounded confidence in me. Tishomingo and James Colbert are the only Indians in this nation who appear to 
have any dislike to me. The first cause of Tishomingo's dislike proceeded from the wild disorder he suffered to 
take place by a party commanded by him when I had formed the nation into four divisions for the purpose of issu- 
ing to them provisions, while distributing the goods sent as presents and as an annuity. I ordered four beeves to 
be killed, and directed that one should be given to each division. Tishomingo's party, in a rude and impertinent 
manner, seized upon the whole. The others apprized me of the outrage; I applied to him, and informed him 
mildly, but positively, that I would not suffer such disorder. He answered he could not help it, and said his men 
would do as they pleased, appearing rather to countenance than discountenance their conduct, for which I severely re- 
buked him. When I proceeded to parcel out the goods, and had formed the Indians under his command for the 
purpose of receiving their rateable part of annuity and presents, a number of them changed their positions, and drew 
several times. This fraud was likewise discovered by the other Indians, and complained of, as well as seen and 
corrected by me. About the 1st of January last past, the storehouses of the United States near the Chickasaw 
Bluffs were broken open in the night-time, by a party of Chickasaw Indians, and a considerable quantity of peltry 
stolen out of them. Mr. Rawlings, (he factor for the United States at that place, informed me of the burglary, and 
I called upon the chiefs to have the fellows punished; and I, in a letter addressed to the Secretary of War, advised 
him of the demand I had made. You will see Tishomingo's speech on that occasion, stating that the Indians who 
had committed that felony had left the nation, (which statement he knew was not true, and that those Indians were 
then living on Cold Water and in his neighborhood.) No person that has travelled the road in the year 1815 from 
Nashvilleto Natchez has been a stranger to the complaints which travellers frequently made of having their horses 
stolen and hid out by Indians on that road, in the neighborhood of the Good springs and Brown's swamp. This 
unpleasant state of things, in my opinion, ought to have met ray disapprobation; at least, that the idea of exemplary 
punishment should have been holden out by the agent of the United States, you may see, as well by the deposi- 
tion of James G. Neely as by that of George Maxwell, which are now in the War Office, and whose reputations 
and families do not rank behind any in the United States for candor, probity, and good morals. This assertion 
would be verified by the honorable Samuel Powell, the honorable William G. Blount, and all the Representatives 
in Congress from the State of Tennessee who know them. The other causes of dislike, when known, have equal 
claim to your approbation, the esteem of my Government, and the confidence of the Chickasaw nation. 

James Colbert, William Colbert, and others, their confederates, being desirous of engrossing all the trade of this 
nation, demanded that I should drive all the traders trading under regular license out of the nation. This demand 
was also made by Tishomingo in council, early last spring, when I informed him that the power exclusively belonged 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 107 

to Congress to regulate trade with foreign nations, among the several States, and withtiie Indian tribes. He then said 
his young men might steal the traders' goods — that is, he might steal them — and that then I would want him branded, 
(alluding to the recommendation I iiad given to him and the rest of the chiefs to whip and brand the Indians that had 
broken open tiie houses and stolen the peltry of the United States at the Chickasaw Bluffs.) I answered him that I hoped 
he was an honest man, but that if he would steal, I certainly had rather see him punished than an ignorant young man; 
for that he ought to set good examples to his young men, and not encourage, countenance, or excuse men who had 
stolen the property of the United States or of travellers; and that complaints were frequently made to me of travel- 
lers' horses being hid out by Indians to get money for feeding them; and that if he did not, I would put a stop to 
it, for that such conduct might, if not prevented, occasion the loss of good men on both sides. I then inquired of 
him if there were any horses in the possession of the Indians that belonged to the white people, and ordered, if 
there were, they should be given up. I then obtained the delivery of nine horses, some of which the Indians gave 
up with great reluctance. When the delegation of the Chickasaws was about to set out to Washington city, objec- 
tions were made by a mmiber of Indians against James Colbert going as an interpreter of the United States. I 
thought it advisable, and most likely to silence all clamor, ro direct him to go on with the delegation. On the 17th 
April, the king, headmen, and warriors met at the old council-house, where it was named that James Colbert was 
going to take on Wigton King with him — a man that the Indians generally, and particularly Tishomingo, had re- 
quested the agent to order out of the nation for malconduct; at which time it was said that King and James Col- 
bert's views were to join in bringing out goods, and Colbert was to cause all the traders to be drawn out of the 
nation, and that they were to engross the entire trade themselves. All this Colbert denied in the most positive 
terms, and said that no man of Wigton King's character should travel in company with him. James Colbert, at 
the same time, in presence of the King and the other chiefs, as well as in the presence and hearing of Mr. George 
Maxwell, declared his love for and confidence in the agent, calling me his father and his friend, and said I had 
done more for the benefit of the nation than all the agents they ever had. Major General Jackson, after he had 
made known the powers of the commissioners, inquired of the Indians in council whom they depended on to transact 
their business? Tishomingo then, in full council, informed the commissioners that their agent could write, and knew 
how to manage their cause, and that they would rely on him to do it. The commissioners do know that I arranged 
their evidence and managed their cause much to their satisfaction, without neglecting the views and interests of the 
United States, or departing, in an)' instance, from those principles of justice and liberality which it is the pride and 
glory of the Government of the United States to administer. Could I, for convenience, with pleasure, be as ready 
as some are to change with the popular sound to defame the best of men, and condemn the best of measures, be- 
cause I did not know their objects, or had neither patience nor prudence to wait for information, I might be the be- 
loved friend of discord, join the popular clamor, and retreat, like the editor of the Clarion, with disgrace to himself 
and friends. My errors may be many, but my enemies appear to be strangers to them; for every thing they charge 
me with, all who know me will affirm is directly opposite to my very nature, and contrary to the practice of all my 
life. I am sorry to name that, when General Jackson informed me he was merely to ask a question whether the 
nation had confidence in me, and that I could have no opportunity to justify my conduct, or to show that I had 
done my duty; and that the offender, or, I may say, the prince of offenders, was to arraign my conduct, and act in 
the capacity of accuser, witness, and judge, who held the power and had the will to speak his own unjust preju- 
dices, and declare them as the voice of the nation, without being able to show a single reason why — I certainly 
have several times solicited an inquiry into my public conduct while agent; I repeat the solicitation, and challenge 
investigation. 

The honorable Jesse Franklin, Esq., before the question was put, inquired of me what I thought would be the 
answer of the council; I informed him I knew that, if the question was put to each individual of the council, there 
would be no dissenting voices but James Colbert and Tishomingo; but that if Tishomingo was to speak, he would 
speak his own prejudices, and say the nation did not like me, although he knew the fact to be otherwise. I 
should not conclude this letter without informing you that several negroes have been lately murdered in this nation 
in a most barbarous, cruel, and unprovoked manner; one belonging to Mr. Thomas Love was shot by an Indian 
while in his master's yard riving boards. The only excuse for this murder is, that the Indian says he did not like 
Mr. Love, and that he would spoil his property. At the request of Mr. Love, I applied to the chiefs, who refused 
to do any thing in the matter, Tishomingo saying that the man who murdered the negro was Mr. Love's relation; 
as if sufficient excuse for the outrage. An Indian called the Young Factor a few weeks since murdered a negro 
by whipping and burning; another sufficient excuse is, that the negro belonged to him. Such are existing circum- 
stances. I have at all times understood that I held my appointment during the pleasure of the President of the 
United States; recent proceedings seem to show it may depend on the Chickasaws. But I have a confidence not 
to be diminished in his magnanimity, justice, and good disposition, which affords a firm reliance that I will be 
indulged with an opportunity of a full inquiry. 

Accept, sir, assurances of the high respect with which I have the honor to be your obedient servant, 

WILLIAM COCKE, Agent for the U. S. to the Chickasaws. 

Hun. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



Sir: Nasshville, October 18, 1816. 

Your letters of the 10th and 12th ultimo, with the extracts referred to, were not received until my arrival 
at this place on the 12th insttnnt. The important contents of those communications could, of course, have no 
effect on a negotiation already^"'^"" '■■ided. 

As had been reported toy '^ ^^'^"'^j^d that the Chickasaws remonstrated with the commissioners against running 
the line as defined in the la^'"^'^'y ^^ -.^^ the Cherokees. This remonstrance was founded on a claim to territory 
which the Chickasaws deemi, """^J^"^ ' ^.^ •'ble, as derived from a charter given and executed by President Wash- 
ington, in the year 1794, d"!'"?^"*^!^ ^ "e.torial limits on the north and east. By a treaty with the Chickasaws in 
1801, this charter was recgn'^eo, wi ' .iVgoigj^n ojuaranty, not only of territorial limits, but of protection in that 
territory from intruders '' every "escriirj^jj^^^ r^^^^ territorial boundaries of the Chickasaws, as defined in said 
charter, include nearly "iH t"^ '»"'* "^^itjed to the Cherokees by the late treaty, but a small triangular extent 
remains. These facts,.io doubt, in uc's^j ^^^ commissioners to listen to the remonstrance of the Chickasaws, and 
suspend their operathns until "ley ''' ^i reported to you and received the positive instructions of the President of 
the United Stales on the subiect. ' ""^^ind policy dictated the measure; for had the commissioners run the line, it 
would inevitably haire excited the K, "Uajg^,, ,o g,, immediate war against the Cherokees. 

These guaranties and treaties af^ lappjjy Jone away, and, generally, to your directions. The definition of the 
lines established by the treaties late y j„„giyjgj ^■^^^ ^■^^ Cherokees and Chickasaws shall be furnished the com- 
missioners, with ilDStructions to con^^^^nce running the lines as early as practicable. 



103 I N D I A N A F F A I R S. [No. 144. 

The Cherokees, as I believe, will make a tender of their whole territory to the United States, for lands on the 
Arkansas, west of the Mississippi. A council is to be held shortly at Willstown, probably to select proper persons 
to explore that country and report its situation, <fec. to the nation. As soon as that is done, a delegation will be 
sent 10 the President to effect the exchange, and General Meriwether will be invited from Georgia to accompany 
them. 

After the ratification of the treaty at Turkeytown, the Cherokees in council complained of the intruders on 
their lands north of the Tennessee river, to both the agent and myself. The agent consequently made the demand 
for their removal, and I have given noiice to all intruders accordingly; and on the 1st of November the troops 
at Fort Hampton will be in motion on this service. 

With respect, &c. 
ANDREW JACKSON, IHaj. Gen. commanding Die. of the South. 

Hon. W. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 

Gentlemen: Department of War, October 26, 1816. 

Your communication of the 4th instant, dated at Turkeytown, has been received, and submitted to the 
President, who expressed his entire approbation of that communication, and of the manner in which the great 
objects of your mission had been accomplished. It would have been very gratifying to the President to have 
obtained a cession of that part of ihe Chickasaw lands which lies within the limits of the State of Kentucky, and 
also of that part of the lands of the Cherokees which lies within the State of Tennessee; but it was foreseen that 
the attainment of the great objects of the mission would materially increase the difficulty of obtaining those cessions 
for the present. 

Whenever the Cherokee nation shall be disposed to enter into a negotiation for an exchange of the lands they 
now occupy for lands on the west side of the Mississippi, and shall appoint delegates clothed with full authority to 
negotiate a treaty for such exchange, they will be received by the President, and treated with on the most liberal 
terms. 

I have the honor to be, &.c. 

GEORGE GRAHAM, Chief Clerk. 

General Andrew Jackson and General David Meriwetubu, Nashville, Tennessee. 

[Duplicates sent to General Meriwether and Major Jesse Franklin, at their places of residence.] 



Sir: Department of War, October 31, 1816. 

Bills to the amount of $5,043, drawn by the commissioners and by Mr. Cocke, on account of the expenses 
attending the treaties lately held with the Indians, have been presented to this Department. As $5,000 had been 
remitted to you on account of expenses, &;c., and as Mr. Anderson, who transmiited those bills, has requested that 
they may not be protested, if money had been forwarded to the commissioners, I have thought it best to return them; 
and to direct an additional remittance of $3,000 to be mnde to you, on account of the expenses attending the 
treaty. This course can be productive of no inconvenience, as Mr. Anderson has requested that the bills may be 
paid by a check on Nashville. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

GEORGE GRAHAM, Acting Secretary of War. 
General Andrew Jacksonj Nashville, Tennessee. 

Sir: Depa fitment of War, November 7, 1816. 

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the IStli ultimo, and am pleased to find that 
you are about to take prompt measures for the removal of all intruders on the lands of the Cherokees. In conse- 
quence of information which has been received from General Meriwether that some persons from Georgia were 
about to take possession of the reservations on the north side of the Tennessee, mentioned in the treaty with tin- 
Cherokees of January 7, 1806, and which are included in the late^cession made by the Chickasaws, I am instructed 
by the President to request that you will persevere in removing all intruders from that part of the lands lately ceded 
by the Chickasaws, and which lie on the north of the Tennessi'e river, and particularly from the above-mentioned 
reservations. W^ith respect to the intruders on the south side of the Tennessee, and who are not protected by the 
act of Congress of the last session, instructions will be forwarded to you in a short time. 

The pay-roll of Captain Allen's company was approved by the late Secretary of War, and the navmaster 
gent-'ral directed to take immediate measures for the payment of the men. I encloso to you Car,'?"-/ '' 'orage 

return, approved, and with directions to the quartermaster to pay it. It was lately returned tr ,^ epartment by 
the paymaster to whom it had been sent with the muster-roll, as not belonging properly to I '* ^""^ meiit. 
I have the honor to be, &c. .„ s, . . ,,. 

GEORGE GRAHAM, Aef"^ Secretary of II ar. 

Gen. Andrrw Jackson, Nashville, Tennessee. 



o r, *'^-*'^' ^"oveynber 11, ISlfi 

Sir: Department op . ' •'"J^"- 

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 2l?^''^"lti''jaJg|y°||.^Q^^'j"?"^|^ of wlncli in- 
structions were immediately given to General Jackson to remove all intiiy'"^''^'"^ imni . ^ ceded by 
the Chickasaws on the north side of the Tennessee river, and particulaf'^y lo prev 'wifl, (ije^r'h k "" ^^ 
those particular tracts of land which had been reserved by the treaty oJs' January, lSi:j , . oKees. 1 Ik. 
bills which the commissioners drew on account of presents have been Vjresented and ,^00,13^,'^'^ '■ "'°''''^"'' dol- 
lars have been remitted to General Jackson, at Nashville, on account (M 'lie expense,- ^^P^ "satiun A^c ot the 
commissioners. After defraying the expenses of the treaty, it is probabl;^ '''e residue „ , ^*^' '"" ■''"'" 
ficient to pay the compensation of all the commissioners; I will therefore tlp^^'k you to n ■^°^^ account, and 
forward it to this Department for payment. V, .. 

I had the honor to address a joint letter to the commissioners a kv/ daj /* since, expre." 1 . , , ""^ ^PPt'oba- 
tion of the President relative to tiieir conduct in the interesting and import;i'"t negotiations"^ '"^ ' "^-^ ^"^ '^'-'^" 
engaged. p 

I have the honor to be, &c. } y ^ t»^ 

GEORGE GR.f HAM, Acting sl'^'^ "/""'«'•• 

Gen. David Meriwether, Athens, Georgia. \ 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 109 

Sir: Department of War, December 4, 1816. 

I liave the lionor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, by Lieutenant Gadsden, of the 12th ultimo, to- 
gether with the original treaties lately concluded with the Cherokee and Chickasaw nations. The treaties have 
been submitted to the President, who has expressed his entire approbation of both of them. 

Your accounts, forwarded by Lieutenant Gadsden, have been approved, and an allowance made for your service 
as a commissioner (which is a claim of right and nut of I'avor) of eight dollars a day from the 20th of August until 
the 1st of November, the amount of which will be retained by you out of the money placed in your hands for the 
Indian department, and the balance then remaining may be applied to the quartermaster's department. General 
Meriwether and Mr. Franklin will settle their accounts at this Department. 

You are authorized, if you deem it proper and expedient, to make an additional present to Tishomingo of five 
hundred dollars. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

GEORGE GRAHAM, Acting Secretary of War. 
Gen. Andrew .Tacicson, Nashville, Tennessee. 



Dear Sir: Department of War, April 4, 1816. 

I have the honor to enclose you a copy of the treaty or convention which has been made with the Cherokees 
for the cession of that portion of their lands which lies within the chartered limits of the Slate of South Carolina. 
It is to be apprehended that this convention will not be ratified, as it was made with some degree of reluctance, 
which was finally overcome by the strong desire which they felt to settle their southern boundary upon just and 
equitable principles. This, I believe, has been done, and they are perfectly satisfied with it. 

I shall address a talk to the nation, in which I shall endeavor to impress them with the justice and fairness of 
the transaction, and the bad consequences which may possibly flow from its rejection. 

Colonel Meigs will be instructed to use his influence with the nation to secure its ratification. He will give you 
the earliest intelligence of the result of his efiTnrts. Should you be disposed to send an agent to attend the national 
council upon this occasion, he will be directed to give you such notice of the lime and place of holding the council 
as will enable you to eflect that object. 

I have the honor to be, «fcc. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

David R. Williams, Governor of South Carolina. 

Gentlemen: Department of War, April 16, 1816. 

Enclosed you will receive the copy of a convention concluded at this place with the deputation of Cherokee 
Indians, which has been ratified by the President. 

It is the desire of the President that you proceed without delay to run and mark the line defined in this con- 
vention. You will be attended by some of the Cherokee chiefs, who are acquainted with the point at which il is to 
terminate. The surveys which General Cofiee has made will probably be of some use to you in the execution of 
this duty. Upon an examination of his report, which is now in this Department, he a))pears to have taken no notice 
of the point at which ihis line is to terminate, notwithstanding he appears to have had in view the convention made 
with the Cherokees in the year 1806, which proposes Caney creek, and a line drawn from its source to the " Flat 
Rock," as the boundary between the Cherokees and Chickasaws. , 

Instructions will be immediately given to the Chickasaw and Choctaw agents to collect such evidence as shall 
be in the power of those nations to furnish concerning their eastern boundaries. They will also be instructed to as- 
certain whether those nations can be induced to dispose of their possessions east of the Tombigbee river, if it sl/all 
appear that their titles to those lands are valid. 

When you shall have completed the lino in question, a general report of your proceedings, comprehending all 
the information you have acquired of the situation, extent, fertility, and salubrity of the ceded country, will be re- 
ceived with pleasure. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

Wm. Baunett, Esq. WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

Colonel Benjamin Hawkins, 

Maj. Gen. Edmund P. Gaines, 

Commissioners for running the line of the Creek cession. 



Friends and Brothers: Department of War, Alay 13, 1816. 

The deputation of your nation has been received by your great father the President as children of the great 
American family. He has taken them by the hand, and spoken to them the words of peace and truth. He has 
listened to all their complaints, and lias redressed, and will redress, all their wrongs. 

Friends and brothers: Your beloved men who have visited your great father the President have, by your in- 
structions, agreed upon a convention, by which a small portion of land has been ceded to the State of South Caro- 
lina for the sum of .$5,000. His excellency the Governor of that State has signified to the President his assent to 
this convention, and has authorized me to inform you that you may draw for the money whenever your nation shall 
ratify the cession. 

Brothers: The land ceded by this convention is of little value to you or to the State of South Carolina. It af- 
fords no game, and none of your people live upon it. It is desirable to .South Carolina only as it will complete her 
settlements, and will bring within her jurisdiction some dishonest white men, who are equally injurious to you and 
to the citizens of that State. Your great father the President will be gratified by the ratification of this convention 
by your nation, as he will see in it a disposition to oblige him and your brothers of South Carolina when it call be 
dune without injury to either. 

Friends and brothers: The long peace which has subsisted between the Cherokees and the whites, and the good 
fiiith which the State of South Carolina has alwnys observed towards their red brethren, will be more stronaly ce- 
mented hy the ratification of this convention. The ratification of this convention is due to the liberality and love 
for the Cherokees which your good father the President has manifested in establishing the lino between your 
lands and the Creek cession, and in paying for all the losses which they have sustained in the course of the last war. 



^ 



110 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 144. 

Your great father the President will not believe that his beloved children of the Cherokees will refuse their consent 
to what has been agreed upon by their worthy deputation, pursuant to the instructions which have been given to 
them. 

Friends and brothers: Your great father the President has given orders that all white men who have settled 
upon your lands shall be immediately removed. Colonel Meigs, who resides among you, has been directed to call 
upon the military officers of the United States to remove by force all white men who have settled upon vour lands 
against your consent. As often as they return to their settlements, they will be removed, and, besides, be punished 
by our courts for the violation of your rights. 

Brothers: Disorderly white men have settled among you, wlio have harassed and vexed the peaceable inhabit- 
ants of the State of Tennessee, and have made their complaints reach the ears of your great father the President. 
These men ought to be removed by your nation to a great distance from our settlements, where they can do no mis- 
chief to the peaceable inhabitants of Tennessee, or your agent ought to require them to be removed from your lands 
as intruders. 

Friends and brothers: The while men whom you permit to live among you must be considered as Cherokees, 
and the^naiion must be answerable for their actions. Your great father the President expects that you will restrain 
their improper conduct, or have them removed as intruders upon your lands. 

Friends and brothers: The President will continue to watch over your peace and happiness: in return, you will 
conduct yourselves peaceably, pursuing your game, attending to your flocks, and cultivating your lands for the sup- 
port of your women and children. The money which he sends you by your agent. Colonel Meigs, will furnish you 
with the means of buying cattle, sheep, and hogs sufficient to supply your wants. Cultivate the arts of peace with 
your red and white neighbors, and your happiness will never be disturbed. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD, 

To the principal Headmen and Warriors of the Cherokee Nation. 

Sir: Department of War, Mai/ 27, 1816. 

The Senators and Representatives of Tennessee, before the adjournment of Congress, presented an address 
to the President urging the expediency of extinguishing the Cherokee title to the lands north of the Tennessee, 
within the limits of that State. As there is no game upon the land, and, I believe, no Indians settled upon it but 
Colonel Lowry, it would appear to be their interest to sell it for a fair consideration: by giving Lowry a present 
equal to the value of his possessions, it is probable that a purchase can be effected of all their lands to the north of 
the river. The President desires that you shall make every exertion to obtain this cession at their next national 
council: to enable you to effect this, you are authorized to give them, either by way of annuity, or to be paid at one 
or more payments after the ratification, the sum of $20,000, and to distribute presents among them to the amount 
of $5,000, and to Lowry to the value of his possessions north of the Tennessee river. It will be proper to ascer- 
tain the relative value of the lands belonging to Tennessee compared with that in the Mississippi Territory, as the 
State of Tennessee ought and must pay her proportion of it. 

Major Walker, in private conversation, told me that he thought the Cherokee nation would sell the land which 
we attempted to purchase last winter: it is deemed expedient to make the effort. You are therefore authorized to 
offer them for their claim to the lands lying west of a line to be run due south from that point on the Tennessee 
river which is intersected by the eastern boundary of Madison county, to the line agreed upon by the late treaty, an 
annuity of $6,000 a year in perpetuity. Considering that the most of this land is claimed by the Chickasaws, and 
that there is little or no game upon it, there is some reason to believe that this offer will not be rejected by ihe nation 
in their grand council. 

The President calculates upon the exercise of all your influence in effecting these objects. No commissioner 
will be appointed, as it is deemed inexpedient to make an impression upon them that we are extremely solicitous to 
obtain the cessions in question. 

I have the honor to be, &,c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

Return J. Meigs, Cherokee Agent. 



Sir: Nashville, June 10, 1816. 

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 20th ultimo, in answer to mine from New 
Orleans of the 11th April. I regret that my best exertions to ward the Government from imposition and prevent 
serious difficulties have proved abortive. 

Mine of April was in answer to yours of the 8th of March, announcing the disapprobation of the President to 
the lines run by the commissioners appointed under the Creek treaty. At that time I had no knowledge of the con- 
vention entered into with the Cherokees, and addressed you with a hope that I might prevent a hasty surrender of 
the country, which, for national security, was all-important to be preserved. On the principle of right and justice, 
the surrender ought never to have been made. The Government has certainly been imposed on. That convention 
should not have been ratified, unless we are getting like the nations of old, who, having become so hardened, would 
not listen to the voice of instruction until brought to repentance by the visitation of some serious calamities. 

The treaty of 1806 is referred to in this convention as a reason for what has been done. I can either not see, 
or not understand, if, in the clause relied on, there is any thing like a recognition of boundary or title. The United 
Stales undertake, and so declare, that they will use their best endeavors that a settlement of the western boundary 
of the Cherokees shall be agreed on by the Chickasaws; but, even if it had been an absolute acknowledgment of 
their boundary, (which is not the fact,) let it be recollected that it was altogether an ex jiarte inquiry, to which the 
Cherokees were, alone present, and could not or ought not to aflect the interest and title of adverse claimants, who 
were not present and not heard. Why the Government should feel a wish to aggrandize the nation at the expense 
of other tribes, or against the interest of their own citizens, is unknown. In this matter the Indians — I mean the 
real Indians, the natives of the forest — are little concerned; it is a stratagem only acted on by the designing half- 
breeds and renegade white men who have taken refuge in their country. If the course now adopted by the Gov- 
ernment is to be pursued, it is difficult to say at what remote period we may calculate on our uniting settlements 
and giving security to our frontiers: this connexion and security, so important, it was believed, had been secured under 
the Cieek treaty; Georgia, with the Mobile country, and Tennessee were united; the Chickasaws and Choctaws were, 
under that arrangement, detached from the other tribes, and here security was obtained; the communication between 
the northern and southern Indians was cut off by the interposition of the white settlements, and thus an additional 
security was had; but, in one day, at the city of Washington, without any evidence in support of the right, except 
what was brought forward by a party deeply interested, and in the absence of all testimony in support of other 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. HI 

claimants, is this inquiry taken up, and the surrender made. Can it be rights Either the Creeks had a title, or 
they had not; if they held under the treaty, it was ceded; if not, it should have been open to investigation, that the 
certainty of the fact might have been ascertained, and a full adduction of every information that could be had on tiie 
subject. 

Were I disposed to throw off the military garb and assume the character of a politician, I think it susceptible of 
argument if the President and Senate have not just as much right in hasty convention to cede away West Florida 
to Spain as to do what has been done. In the circumstances of the two cases there is a marked resemblance: France 
cedes the lower country; Spain claims it; the cession makes the title complete; and, if France had any, it estops 
the President and Senate to give it to any Power whatever. The Creek treaty makes the country ceded, beginning 
where the Cherokee southern line crosses the Coosa, and running, &c.: these lines are, by the treaty, to be ascertained 
by commissioners hereafter to be appointed. 1 undersiand it to be a maxim both of law and reason that what can be 
rendered certain is already sufficiently special. Though it was not defined where this line would cross the Coosa, 
yet when the commissioners, the agents of the Government, came to act, it was their duty to call in and rely on 
the best evidence they could procure declarative of this fact: this was done; from that moment the title to the ceded 
country vested in the United States became a part of its territory, and was beyond the control of the treaty-making 
power. 

Agreeably to the present course adopted, I would ask, when will Indian claims be extinguished on our borders? 
The title is procured of one tribe, another claims it, and from liim also is the extinguishment to be had; effect this, 
and again another claimant presents iiimself. On the principles pursued by the Government of so carefully avoiding 
injustice to these tribes as even to be unjust to themselves, I say it is difficult to fix a time when we may expect a 
connexion of our territory by the possession of tlieir claims: the assent of all will first be necessary to be had; and all 
will require to be extravagantly paid. With the commissioners there was no difficulty in ascertaining the Cherokee 
boundary; if their report had been agreed to, all would have been satisfied, except a few designing lialf-breeds and 
white men, who have manifested such deep concern on this occasion. 

I accord with you perfectly in sentiment that a nation should never acquire advantages, however important, by 
acts of injustice; and expect you will be equally ready to concede that, for the sake of being over just, that nation 
should not heap injustice on herself and her own people. Justice and right are concomitant. If a nation has no right 
to the thing demanded, there can be no justice in acceding to the demand; it may be charity to do so; and then I 
would deny they could practise this Christian virtue at the expense of their own citizens: 1 deny it to be good policy' 
to buy the friendship of any nation; it costs too much; for it lasts no longer than the price is recollected and continued; 
and I very much question, too, if it is not of as much importance to preserve the confidence of our own citizens as 
that of the Cherokee Indians. 

The universal clamor is, that injustice has been done, and that the Indians had no title to the lands ceded. Ten- 
nessee, I hope, will never disgrace herself by opposing the Government; but when it is recollected that, in open 
violation of the orders of the United States, in 1794, a campaign was set on foot that broke the hostile spirit of 
the Cherokees and secured peace, judging of human nature it may be believed that when these people are ordered 
from the old Creek villages burnt by General Coffee, and which they aided to conquer, they will feel disposed to 
wreak their vengeance on this tribe. Common report says that these people, who have settled in considerable numbers 
on this land, a.'e much enraged; that they are perfectly disposed to meet the views of the Government, but cannot 
accede to the idea of its being taken away to be given to a people who have no title, and who have been assailing 
them from the earliest settlement of the country. Should these people be attempted to be removed, how is it to be 
done? The militia will not answer for this service; they are not to be relied on for such an undertaking, because their 
feelings are the same with the settlers. If a regular force be resorted to, that force will require to be kept up, or 
the situation of these people will be hazardous indeed. When I say the militia will not aid in obtaining a surrender 
of this land to the Cherokees, I speak in reference to the discontents, murmurs, and anxieties manifested by all upon 
this subject, from whence the conclusion is fairly to be inferred. Enclosed is a letter from the Governor of the Stale, 
which will show you how important the country is considered, and bow unrighteous and unjust the cession is viewed. 

You are mistaken in supposing an army can so readily pass this section of country; it could not be passed in two 
or three days, as you suppose. There is no point on the Tennessee where a road to New Orleans and Natchez will 
cross that is less than eighty miles from the Creek village, on the Black Warrior, burnt by General Coffee, below 
which the line is to cross. A road leading through this country will make the distance not less than one hundred 
miles. The Flat Rock spoken of in the conversation nobody knows any thing about, unless it be the southeast and 
northeast corner of where the Choctaw and Chickasaw tribes claim, which is south of the Cotton Gin Port, on Mobile. 
Should the Choctaw claim prevail, as the Cherokee has done, the country below will contain a very narrow strip of 
good land, not sufficient to afford supplies adequate to the support of an army necessary for the defence of the lower 
country. 

I have now done: political discussion is not the province of a military officer. As a man, I am entitled to my 
opinion, and have given it freelv. • I have the honor to be, &c. 

ANDREW JACKSON. 

Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War, 



Sir: Department op War, June 15, 1816. 

Your letter of the 26th ultimo reached the Department this day. In my letter of the 16th April, which 
enclosed a copy of the convention with the Cherokees, you were instructed to run the line agreeably to that treaty. 
As you do not state the date of the last letter which you have received from the Department, it is presumed that 
the letter before referred to had not then been received. A copy of it is enclosed. 

As the resignation of General Gaines created the contingency upon which General Coffee was to act, it was 
thought unnecessary to give any special authority in the case. 

Should he decline acting, upon the receipt of the letter this day sent to him, you are authorized and required to 
run the line agreeably to the treaty, in the absence of both the other commissioners, should Colonel Hawkins not 
have rejoined you before the receipt of this letter. 

The report to which you refer has reached this Department only through Colonel Hawkins, who says he was 
informed of it by you. It is not an object of any importance at this time, and it is more than probable that an 
attempt to ascertain its truth would be fruitless. 

I am obliged to you for the names of the persons who can establish the frauds practised upon the Government 
by the agents of the contractor. The matter must be examined, and the culprits exposed to the public indignation. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

William Barnett, Huntsville, Madiion county, Mississippi Territory. 



112 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 144. 

Sir: Department op War, June 19, 1816. 

Your letter of the 4tli instant has been received this day by the mail. The paper enclosed was produced 
by the Cherokee deputation which accompanied Colonel Meigs to this place last winter. The whole paper, taken 
toirether, certainly presents the idea that the boundaries designated in the first part of it had been agreed upon by 
the parties, and that you were acquainted with the facts. The note at the bottom of that article asserts that the 
execution of a convention was del'erred upon your advice. 

I agree with you that the particular iilstrument to which your name is subscribed, taken separately, warrants 
the construction which you have placed upon it. The whole paper, taken together, is certainly calculated to make 
an impression that is inconsistent with the rational construction of the instrument signed by you, when considered 
separately. I have no distinct recollection of any representations of|Colonel Meigs upon this subject; and, on that 
account, can only say that he made none which were calculated to remove the impressions whicli that paper pro- 
duced, considered as one entire act. 

By the proceedings of our commissioners, the Cherokee boundary was considered to extend down the Coosa to 
the lower end of the Ten Islands. Testimony furnished by Colonel Hawkins establishes the same fact. By our 
conventions with that tribe, we have admitted that their claim south of the Tennessee extended west as far as 
Caney creek, and I'rom thence to the Flat Rock, and engaged to endeavor to obtain the Chickasaws' consent to that 
boundary. This latter tribe have the declaration of General Washington that their title extends over the greatest 
part of the lands claimed by the Cherokees west of the Chickasaw old fields. All these circumstances, if they do 
not clearly establish their respective rights, at least prove that there is but little certainly in Indian boundaries. 
We know that the Cherokee title extends as far south on the Georgia side as the high shoals on the Appalacliee, 
from whence a due west line would strike the Coosa south of the Ten Islands. It is not wonderful that great uncer- 
tainly should exist in Indian boundaries, where records are unknown, and where the lands claimed are never 
wholly occupied. In this state of uncertainty, an enlightened and liberal nation should not set aside the claims of 
its ignorant and savage neighbors, where they have ever been recognised by any act of the Government. These 
recognitions have been made in favor of the Cherokees and Chickasaws to the land which you insist belonged to the 
Creeks. Where we are judges in our own cause, and where the weakness of the other party does not admit of an 
appeal from our decision, delicacy, as well as a proper sense of justice, should induce us to lean in favor of the 
claim adverse to ours. I am very far from believing that we have yielded any thing to the Cherokees which they 
had not a right to demand. In this opinion I may be mistaken, as the evidence is certainly not of the character 
which amounts to demonstration. We have done, in this case, what I would have done where my individual 
interest was concerned, and where the decision was left to myself. This is the point of view in which the case 
ought to be considered. We are in no danger from any act of liberality towards the Indian tribes within our limits. 
The lands south of the Cherokee line, «hen settled, will furnish a population equal to the repulsion of any enemy 
which may be brought to act against it. There is, therefore, no inducement to re-examine this subject, or to 
question its validity. In an enlightened nation, subnnssion to the laws is the fundamental principle upon which 
the social compact must rest. No apprehension is entertained of the consequences which you appear to forebode. 
The treaty with the Cherokees has been approved by the Senate and House of Representatives, and is the supreme 
law of the land. Submission to it is a duty which will not be neglected. At the same time, it is admitted that 
the acquisition of this territory is desirable, and no proper occasion for acquiring it will be omitted. The same 
policy will be pursued with regard to the Chickasaws. The claims of the LFnited States will be pressed as far as 
justice will admit, and liberal compensation will be offered where their rights are deemed to be valid. For this 
purpose, you will, in the instructions which will be forwarded, have the most ample powers. The views of the 
Executive will be fully explained in those instructions, and, I have no doubt, will be approved by an enlightened 
public. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

Major General Andrew Jackson, Nashville, Tennessee. 



Sir: Department of War, June 24, 1816. 

In my letter of the 27th of May, you were instructed to renew to the Cherokee nation the offer which was 
made to their deputation last winter for extinguishing their title to the lands lyintr west of a line drawn due south 
from that point of the Tennessee tiver intersected by the eastern boundary of Madison county. In my letter of 
the 15th instant, you were directed to use your best exertions to induce the Cherokees to send a deputation to the 
negotiations which are to be opened with the Chickasaws on the 1st of September next, for the purpose of settling 
all disputes in relation to boundary between the several Indian tribes represented in that negotiation. 

Should you not have an opportunity to act upon the former of these instructions before this deputation shall set 
out for the Chickasaw nation, or should the proposition be declined, the President desires that you will make every 
exertion in your power to induce the nation to invest the deputation with full powers in relation to this object. 

As these lands are respectively claimed by the Cherokees and Chickasaws, and as it is intended that their 
respective rights shall be investigated by the American commissioners, the impossibility of agreeing among them- 
selves may lead to a determination on both sides to dispose of their litigated claims to the United States, who are 
disposed to give them a liberal price for the lands in dispute between them. 

I have the honor to be, &,c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

Colonel Return J. Meigs, Cherokee Agent, Rhea Court-house, Tennessee. 



Extract of a letter from W. H. Crawford, Secretary of War, to Major General Andrew Jackson, dated 

Sir: July 1, 1816. 

The ferment produced in the public mind in the State of Tennessee, by misrepresentations in relation to 
the Cherokee convention, is the more to be regretted as it can only tend to the injury of those who are led astray. 
That convention, as well as every other which has been, or shall be, ratified by the President, with the advice of 
the Senate, will be strictly executed, unless the Cherokee and Chickasaw title to the lands in question shall be 
extinsuished by the commissioners appointed to treat with the latter tribe. 

The idea attempted to be imposed upon the public by the intruders, that they are ready to remove from their set- 
tlements as public property,, but not as Indian lands, is too shallow a device to deceive the most inconsiderate. 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 113 

The most of these intruders have entered upon the land in question since the running of General Coffee's line, and 
are as liable to be removed as though the act of Congress had never passed. That act provides only for those 
who had intruded before the 1st day of February last, on the ground that the proclamation was not known before 
they had entered upon the public land. 

The intruders upon the lands in question acted witli full knowledge upon the subject, (or, at least, they had the 
means of knowing that their intrusion was both in violation of the law and the proclamation,) and yet they have the 
eflrontery to talk of submission to the laws. It is easy to make professions, and nearly as easy to devise pretexts 
for an unlawful act, especially if it is not thought necessary that they should even be plausible: this appears to be 
the case in tiie present instance. Tiiis delusion must be terminated. The idea of resisting the authority of the 
Government must not be admitted for a moment. As the execution of tiie law, should it be resisted, will immedi- 
ately devolve upon you, as the commanding general of the southern division, it is expected that you will use vour 
influence to arrest this momentary delusion, which, otherwise, may possibly be carried so far as to make the inter- 
ference of the military indispensable. This unpleasant alternative is by no means apprehended; but the very idea 
of it ought not to be permitted to exist. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

Major General Andrew Jackson, Nashville, Tennessee. 



[In answer to the letter of the Secretary of War, dated May 13, 1816.] 

Friends and Brothers: Cherokee Agency, Jtili/ 31, 1816. 

We this day considered the substance of the Secretary of War's letters respecting the cession of land made 
to the State of South Carolina, concluded at the city of Washington. We have unanimously agreed and confirmed 
the above cession of land, saving and reserving five tracts of land, each tract to contain six hundred and forty acres, 
to each of the following improvements, viz: one tract to Samuel Adair, an improvement on the village creek, 
waters of Fugaloo river; one tract to Sally iNicholson, an improvement on the waters of Keowee river; one tract 
to Nancy Starr, an improvement on the village creek, adjoining to Samuel Adair's improvement; one tract to 
Waller Adair, on Chattuga river, at a place called Chattuga Old Town; one tract to Samuel Martin, on the 
waters of Keowee river. The above reserved tracts of land to descend to the above-named persons, their heirs, 
and assigns, forever. The nature of holding our lands is such, that we hold our lands in common right; the chiefs, 
therefore, have no right to disposess any Cherokee whatever of his improvement without his consent, which causes 
us to make the above reserves to the persons above named; and, hoping all the money will be paid in specie as soon 
as possible. 

We remain vour friends and brothers, in behalf of the national council, 

TOOCHALEE, his x mark. 

SOUR MUSH, his X mark. 

BOOTS, his X mark. 
Waller Adair and Thomas Wilson, Clerks. 

Sir: Cherokee Agency, August 8, 1816. 

I feel anxiously concerned on account of the agitation of the public mind in relation to the late commotion 
of boundary with the Cherokees. I have not time to enumerate the argimients founded on documents or on tra- 
ditional history that may be advanced in support of that convention; but, so far as I have been able to examine 
the subject, that convention, in my view, appears to have been correctly made. I have seen observations in the 
Clarion on that subject, that convince me that the writers were not well informed on the subject of Indian rights, 
or bearing on their claims. Arguments raised, and deductions and conclusions founded on premises merely assumed, 
not bottomed on facts, are of no value; and the connecting that subject with the character of the army under vour 
command has an appearance of making a sectional division, which the enemies of our country may avail them- 
selves of. I have reflected on these things with painful sensations. 

As to the army under your command, it stands unrivalled in fame. The misconduct of individuals, the depre- 
dations committed by some men in an army, do no more commit the military character of that army than the spots in 
the sun destroy the splendor of that luminary. It may only be compared to the transit of Venus over its disk; its 
light and heat are not diminished by such adventitious things, which have always happened, and will ever happen, 
in the course of events. After the conquest of Canada by General Wolfe, General Murray commanded Quebci: 
with a garrison of four thousand men, veteran soldiers; those veterans mutinied, and succeeded; that great general 
was compelled to make stipulations with them: yet I never heard that the military character of the conquerors of 
Canada suffered any diminution on that account. Your character, and the character of Coffee, and Carroll, and 
others, cannot be even touched by the conduct of some unruly, insubordinate men. And to demand the expunging an 
article of a treaty solemnly made by the constitutional treaty-making power, appears to me to be fraught with an 
evil of very great magnitude, and cannot add any thing to the acknowledged character of your army. 

AH the mischief that has been done only proves the acknowleged fact, that men of great virtues may make 
sometimes aberrations from the right, and, like the tremulous needle, settle to the polar star. My motives forgiving 
you the trouble to read this as supplemental to my letter of the 7th are independent of all selfish considerations. 

I have, &c. 

Major General .\ndrf.w Jackson. RETURN J. MEIGS. 



Sir: Cherokee Agency, August 19, 1816. 

The Cherokee chiefs and others having pay due for military service, and on account of spoliations on their 
property by disorderly men among the troops during the Creek war, assembled here on the 20th July ultimo, 
agreeably to notice, for receiving their respective dues. The principal business being done, the council broke up on the 
3d instant. During their stay here, conferences were had on the subject of obtaining cessions of the lands pointed out 
by your instructions. Governor McMinn attended in person with Colonel Williams, the commissioner in behalf of 
the State of Tennessee, to negotiate with the Cherokees for the cession of the lands of that State lying on the north 
side of the river Tennessee, including the land in the Mississippi Territory adjoining Madison county. 

In the course of the several conferences, I made every exertion in my power, and was duly aided by Governor 
McMinn and Colonel Williams, to induce the Cherokees to relinquish their claim to the lands on the south side of 
15 E 



114 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 144. 

the river Tennessee, lying within the following limits, that is to say: Beginning at a point where the eastern bound- 
ary of Madison county intersects tiie Tennessee river, and bounded east on a line to be run due south from that 
point until it shall intersect the line lo be drawn from a point opposite the Ten Islands in Coosa river; such 
course and distance as will strike the " Flat Rock or Stone, the old corner boundary," on a branch of Bear creek; 
thence, a direct course, to the main source of Caney creek; thence, down the said creek, to its confluence with the 
Tennessee river; thence with the Tennessee river, in its meanders, to the place of beginning. For this relinquish- 
ment and cession I offered them $6,000 in perpetuity, and that the first annuity arising out of this stipulation should be 
paid within thirty days after the ratification of the treaty. In this stage of the negotiation there appeared a good 
prospect of succeeding. It was urged on them that their duty to the Government, which had listened to them while 
at the city by their deputation, and by the constant care of them, required a compliance with the demands of that 
Government; that their interest, perhaps their security, required it, (having reference to the agitation of the citizens 
of West Tennessee;) and although in my opinion groundless, it nevertheless existed. But notwithstanding all that 
could be done, they the next day gave an answer in the negative, not without some apparent concern, and agreed 
to appoint a delegation invested with full powers to renew the negotiation with the United Stales commissioners at 
the Chickasaw national council-house on the 1st September next. The Cherokee chiefs are to meet on the 20th 
instant at Willstown; they will there appoint the delegation, who will proceed from that place to meet the United 
States commissioners at the place above mentioned on the 1st of September. 

They refused to comply with the proposals and offers for the lands in the State of Tennessee lying on the north 
side of Tennessee river. Colonel Lowry would have been entirely willing to comply with the oflers made to him, 
(he retaining the ferry place he now holds on the Tennessee river,) but there were others (not less than thirty or 
forty families) on that land; some of them have very valuable possessions, among whom are George Lowry, a 
brother of Colonel Lowry, Major James Brown, and John Brown. The chiefs objected to the price, ($20,000;) and 
the principal settlers on that land urged it as a hardship to be removed without remuneration. It was not in my 
power, and Governor McMinn and Colonel Williams would not take on themselves the responsibility of offering 
more. Governor McMinn will probably be at the council in the Chickasaw nation. With respect to confirming 
the treaty made conditionally at the city by the Cherokee deputation for South Carolina, they also objected to the 
consideration, ($5,000;) but they, as they expressed it, agreed to confirm that treaty, but annexed conditions that 
deprive it of half its value — by reserving five tracts for individuals, probably the most of the good land on that tract. 
This was deemed entirely inadmissible, as it could not be received clogged with new conditions. I enclose their 
answer. 

Notwithstanding we failed in our efforts here, I have no doubt of their complying with and agreeing to cede the 
lands southwest of Madison county. They have been informed of the state of the popular mind in West Ten- 
nessee; and, whether right or wrong, it equally affects their interests. Bui, independent of these circumstances, it is 
evidently their interest to cede that land to the United States, and I am confident they will do it. 

I received two letters from General Jackson, making use of strong language in reprobating the convention with 
the Cherokees, both with respect to boundary and the grant to indemnify the Cherokees for spoliation on their 
property, asking me for an explanation of the last. I have sent him a copy of all the claims, with such explana- 
tions as I think ought to remove his objections. I sent him certificates from Brigadier General White and Brigadier 
General Doherty, and, if it were necessary, could have sent a hundred. The more I examine those claims, the 
more I am convinced that the)' are just and ought to be paid. There may be instances of fraud — I know of none 
such. I had a doubt about the great claim of Ratcliff, and inquired of numbers about it; they all, except one, replied 
to me that Ratcliff had very large stocks of cattle. When he came for pay, I questioned him and explained to him 
the nature of an oath, and required of him to make affirmation of the truth of his account of loss; which he did, be- 
fore I paid him, solemnly, in the presence of the Great Spirit. 

I wrote two letters to General Jackson, (one of the 6th, one of the 7th, and one supplemental to that of the 7th, 
dated the 8th instant,) a copy of which I send by this conveyance. An attempt to expunge an article of a treaty as 
a peace-offering to groundless demands! What a monstrous perversion of language to say that drawing a line 
between two Indian tribes is a cession to either of them. By the nature of the compact between the United States 
and Cherokees, they were considered as in a state of minority. The United States, by the first treaty held with 
them, have the exclusive right to regulate trade and to manage all their affairs as they think proper, as expressed 
in the ninth article of the treaty of Hopewell in 1785. This language undoubtedly includes the right of the allot- 
ment of land. When the Government, therefore, propose to them an alteration of their boundary line for a valua- 
ble consideration, they, in fact, have not the right to refuse a compliance with such proposal. We have never told 
them this in plain language, because we wish them to see their true state and condition; they cannot carve out for 
themselves. If the compacts between them and the United States were dissolved, and they left as an independent 
community, their ruin, their annihilation as a distinct people, wcwild very soon be a consequence of such fictitious 
independence. I am one of the last men that would infringe their rights. I would lead them to civilization without 
injuring an individual, until they gradually and almost imperceptibly become blended with ourselves. And to effect 
this, they must circumscribe their immense limits; for while they can roam through extensive forests, (where in this 
mild temperature they can partly subsist themselves on the spontaneous productions,) they will not make use of their 
physical or mental faculties to raise themselves up. " Poor human nature, alone, revolts at the thought of the labor 
required and the sacrifices to be made to arrive at a state of civilization." 

One of the scinbblers in the Clarion, a paper edited at Nashville, bas the audacity to say, " Who ever heard 
of the spoliations on the Cherokees, except through the channel of the convention'?" and proceeds to ask, " What 
services have the Cherokees rendered in the war?" It may be answered that thousands witnessed both; that, ir» 
nearly all the battles with the Creeks, the Cherokees rendered the mos:t efficient service, and at the expense of the 
lives of many fine men, whose wives and children and brothers and sisters are mourning their fall. A number of 
the widows and children have applied to me for something for support, and I have advanced them some aid — perhaps 
in the whole to the amount of $100. Some of these have made repeated applications for aid, but I was compelled 
to deny them, having no authority to do it. I shall as soon as possible recommend a person to be appointed an 
assistant or deputy in this agency. I have the honor, &c. 

RETURN J. MEIGS. 

P. S. If the convention of boundaries with the Cherokees shall be suffered to be mutilated, or altered in any 
way to deprive the Cherokees of their rights to the land as secured by that convention, or of the pay for spoliations^ 
it will be unjust. Human ingenuity cannot make a convention better founded on justice and on the best evidence 
the nature of the case could possibly admit. 

The writers on this subject in the Nashville papers only show their inability and their utter incompetency for 
discussing the subject. R. J. M. 

Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. , 115 



Sir: Executive Office, October 25, 1816. 

Your confidential and esteemed favor of tlie 2d instant came safe to hand by tlie last mail. I have read ils 
very interesting contents with my utmost attention, and very much esteem the plan for its marked circumspection, 
and at the same time for ils liberality in point of the exercise of the puwer it is intended to convey. 

I must beg your excellency's goodness in assuring the President of the United States that I shall equally guard 
against a construction of his orders which might lead to a profligate waste of blood or treasure, as I would against 
a parsimonious policy, which eventually might lead us into a state of difficulty and danger, without the means of 
being extricated; and further to express to the President tiiat, if his iiighly beneficial and honorable administration 
is not to close without again unsheathing the sword, the citizen soldiery of Tennessee, who were lastin the field 
at the close of the late war, will ardently thirst to be in the front at the commencement of the next. 

With high consideration, «fcc. 

JOS. McMlNN. 
Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War Department. 



Sir: Executive Office, Knoxville, October 25, 1816. 

I do myself the honor of addressing you on the subject of a treaty with the Cherokee Indians, authorized 
by your order of the 27tii May last, for extinguishing their entire claim to lands on the north side of Tennessee 
river. 

According to existing statutes, Tennessee was called upon to participate in the expense, and, by the same author- 
ity, became vested with a qualified power to aid in the formation of treaties within a given space. Colonel John 
Williams was therefore appointed commissioner, who, with myself, attended at the Cherokee agency in the 
latter part of July, when your instructions were read and explained, and the sum toial ordered to be given 
was distinctly proposed by Colonel Williams in the precise manner contained in your directions before referred to. 

The proposition, however, resulted contrary to our earnest wishes, and even to an expectation which was gene- 
rally entertained in the latter stage of the negotiation, (the close of which took place on the 3d August,) or rather the 
adjournment, as the Indians proposed that we should have an interview prior to Colonel Williams setting out for 
Washington city, and for the result of which I beg leave to refer you to that gentleman. 

In the mean time, however, I determined to make another experiment with them at the Chickasaw agency, and 
for which purpose 1 obtained the favor of General Jackson under a special commission to renew your proposition 
of the 27th May last, to which General Jackson made the following report: " The Cherokees would not cede their 
claim north of Tennessee, but are inclined, and as I believe will, shortly tender to the United States their whole 
territory where they now live for lands west of the Mississippi." " They say," continued he, " if we sell our lands 
north of the Tennessee river, we will not have sufficient area left to obtain by barter a sufficient country west of the 
Mississippi for our whole nation." Thus, it seems, that part of the negotiation ended. 

Since the policy of the Cherokees appears to be in favor of exchanging territory, I would beg leave to be in- 
dulged in suggesting to your honor the propriety of renewing to the Cherokees a proposition made to them during 
the administration of Mr. Jefferson for an exchange of territory as heretofore stated, with such modifications as you 
may deem expedient. And I will here ask your permission to offer one or two for your consideration. 

1st. That each able-bodied male Cherokee embracing the plan shall be furnished at some suitable point west 
of the Mississippi with a good new rifle gun, some powder, lead, &c.; and allot to those who choose to remain where 
they now reside, say six hundred and forty, or one thousand acres of land to each family, to them, their heirs, &c. 
during their continuance thereon; and each Cherokee Indian thus settled to be considered as entitled to all the rights 
of a free citizen of color of the United States, to be subject to the payment of taxes for their lands, polls, &c. 

2d. And should any one or more of the Cherokees to whom lands have been allotted, their heirs or legal repre- 
sentatives, incline to dispose of their land claim with its improvements, they may be at liberty to sell, but to none 
other than an American citizen, and that on a lease for say five or ten years; at the expiration of which lease the 
land shall revert to the United States, unless it should lie within the limits of some particular State, the Legislature 
o'." which shall dispose of said lands at discretion. 

Very respectfully, &c. 

JOS. McMINN. 

Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of Department of War. 



Sir; Executive Office, October 26, 1816. 

I take the liberty of forwarding one other extract from General Jackson's letter to me of the 16th instant, 
in the following words: " We have obtained from the Cherokees and Chickasaws all the disputed territory on the 
south side of the Tennessee, and all the Chickasaw claim north of that river." 

This tract of country is the one which excited so much sensibility within the State of Tennessee through the 
course of last summer, and it was not until the views of the General Government were in some measure disclosed 
that its fury could be repelled; but, sir, at present the most zealous and turbulent are hushed into a pleasing silence, 
and the former high confidence reposed by the citizens in the Executive and heads of departments, so far as I see 
and hear, is entirely restored; and, for myself, I most ardently regret its absence for a moment. 

I presume I stand enrolled in your office as one of the discontented, and I became so from having a very ancient 
and tolerably accurate knowledge of the country, and the vast importance it would be to the nation at a period per- 
haps not very remote from the present; and this opinion will be demonstrated should a state of war render it ne- 
cessary to march an army to Mobile, or ils neighboring points of fortification. To have the possession we now enjoy 
of this country will not only facilitate, but it will render secure, the transportation of military stores to a more satis- 
factory extent than if taken through the dominions of any nation, however well disposed. But there is a second 
reason of at least equal weight with the preceding one. This immense territory will enable us to consolidate our 
settlements from Lake Erie, on the north, to the St. Mary's, Mobile, &c. on the south. These being the two extremes 
of the nation, and liable to attack by our lale as well as by our anticipated enemy, renders the acquisition of this 
country valuable almost beyond description. 

My third and last reason why 1 felt so very solicitous that the Indian claim should be extinguished to the country 
in question was for the special benefit of my fellow-citizens of Tennessee. The possession of that country will 
enable not only the citizens of Tennessee, but also those of the western counties of Virginia, to find a market for 
their surplus produce and domestic manufactures infinitely nearer home than any other which has been or ever will be 
discovered. 



]16 INDIANAFFAIRS. [No. 144. 

My object in first addressing this letter was, in the first place, to point out to your view some of the national 
and special advantages which I have supposed would result; and, if you conceive the positions laid to be founded 
in truth and national policy, I pray you to have the goodness to believe that they formed the only motive from 
which I acted. And the copy of my letter addressed to General Jackson, which I have already presumed is in your 
office, is tlie only paper in existence written on this subject to which ray signature does appear, except what I had 
previously written to General Jackson;, and, on the score of private interest in relation to this subject, I have not 
now, nor do 1 ever expect to possess to the amount of one cent. 

In the second place, I beg leave to tender to the President of the United States, and to you as the head of tlie 
War Department, my grateful obligations, my entire approval of and high esteem for the able, frank, and friendly- 
manner in which a period was placed to the first and only transaction through the whole of Mr. Madison's admin- 
istration which did not receive the warm and decided approbation of the citizens of Tennessee, whose cheerful 
acquiescence, in the present instance, I beg leave to enrol with that of, sir. 

Yours, &c. 

Hon. \V. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. JOS. McMlNN. 



Sir: Cherokee Agency, November 8, 1816. 

I have had the honor to receive your letter of the ISlh September last. Your observations relating to the 
present condition and future prospects of the Cherokee nation, both in this country and on the Arkansas river, corre- 
spond perfectly with my ideas. You observe that " the chiefs of that nation must be sensible that they cannot much 
longer exist in the exercise of their savage rights and customs; they must become civilized, or they will finally (as so 
many tribes have already) become extinct." 

I have a long time been of this opinion, and have stated the same ideas to such of them as I thought capable of 
comprehending the subject. These ideas have lately apparently gained ground amongst them; a considerable num- 
ber are in preparation to move to the Arkansas, where they contemplate to continue agriculture and manufactures, and 
the means of school education. Some of their first characters have recently expressed their determination to remove 
to that country. They find that pressures on them for cessions of land will probably be soon made from Tennessee, 
South Carolina, and Georgia; and although they can, in the first instance of the application, say no, at the same 
time they feel that they cannot long resist reiterated applications; and they anticipate that in this way their limits 
will be circumscribed. And this is not all they have to fear: for many of them will migrate to the west, land or no 
land. And in this way they will crumble to pieces, and their identity as a nation will be lost; to prevent which it 
is clear to me that they must exchange their land here for land west of the Mississippi river; there they may pre- 
serve their national existence to some more remote period. Thej' are aware, even if placed on the west of Arkansas, 
that they must probably make cessions of lands to the United States in that country, but they presume that they 
shall be less pressed on that subject there than here; and to guard against, or rather to provide for, such a contin- 
gency, it has been suggested to me by an intelligent Cherokee, that, in allotting a tract ol'land for them on Arkansas 
river, it would be well for them, and no damage to the United States, to have only three definite lines drawn to 
designate such allotment, leaving the boundary westward open as a wilderness; so that, as they make cessions on 
the east side, they may make proportionate advances on the west. He added that he did not require the United 
States to buy out the Indian rights, if such existed; that the Cherokees would manage that in their own way. This 
state of things I have some years expected would take place, and, in order to place the subject of exchange in a 
more specific point of view, I have drawn for my own satisfaction the form of a treat}' or convention of an exchange 
of land with the Cherokees — it is only an essay, but we must begin somewhere — a transcript of which will accom- 
pany this letter. It will be found, by calculation, that the cost of the articles enumerated in the second article for 
the encouragement of agriculture, domestic manufactures, and for hunting, will amount to about $20,000. The 
articles for the chase and for agriculture are of the first necessity for them on their arrival in that country. They 
must the first year make crops of corn for bread; they will suffer the first year unless they have the means of ac- 
quiring a subsistence ready at hand. It is a great thing to remove such a number of families to that country, and 
will cause a great expense. They will require a considerable number of boats to move their families of old men 
and young children, and such articles for housekeeping as are necessary for them. The men will principally go 
with their live stock by land, by way of Chickasaw Bluffs. The whole expense of moving, which will amount ;o 
some thousands of dollars, I have omitted in the estimate. Whether this expense ought to be borne by themselves 
or by Government, is a question for consideration. It appears to me that the expense of making the exchange 
ought greatly to exceed what I have stated above. The sum, as contemplated above, is only a feather contrasted 
with the advantage to be derived to the United States by the exchange. The garrison ought not to be considered 
as an expense incurred on this account, because we ought to have strong posts on the western frontier; and the factory, it 
may be presumed, will maintain itself. If the Spanish patriots succeed prosperously, we shall have good neighbors; 
but if Ferdinand shall rule Spanish America, we shall have bad neighbors: it cannot be otherwise, because super- 
stition and fanaticism will quarrel with liberality in religion and politics. 

I beg leave to hazard my opinion that if $100,000 should be expended, to be paid by proper instalments, to effect 
this exchange, it would be but just. The Cherokees think they have suffered great loss by the inaccuracies of land 
transactions with them formerly, (not from design, but from inevitable errors,) since the first treaty with them under 
the American Government in 1785. By the contemplated exchange we shall gain eleven or twelve millions ol' 
acres of land in the very place, above all others, where we could wish it to strengthen our country towards the sea- 
coast. Georgia will be made immensely rich by the exchange, Tennessee will acquire a very great addition to her 
wealth, and the United States will have a valuable tract for sale lying within the limits of the Mississippi Territory. 
Some people are willing to consider the Indians as devoid of those sentiments which we feel. Many of them have 
strong local attachments to the country where the bones of their fathers are deposited; some of them are well settled 
as able farmers. It is easily conceived, therefore, that, to induce them to move, it must be done by holding out to them 
real, solid, and substantial advantages. The Indians are very slow in their negotiations; it will take time to effect 
such an important change in their circumstances; and, as far as I can discover, they would prefer having the busi- 
ness in question done at the seat of Government. If not done there, it will be necessary to have two or three com- 
missioners appointed, of very respectable characters; and if of high rank, the better; they have a strong predilection 
in favor of rank. 

My tour to Turkeytown, and in attending trial of the two Indians, having been particularly requested, has pre- 
vented me from earlier answering your letters. I have lost by th(»se hindrances twenty-seven days. Governor 
McMinn and Colonel Williams are very desirous to have a deputation «f Cherokee chiefs to go to the city during 
the session of Congress on the business of the exchange. It is very doubtful at present whether the Cherokees will 
be prepared by their consultations soon enough to go before very late in the winter or early in the spring. Would 
it not be well to have the subject of the exchange of lands laid before the Cherokees in a specific form, or as nearly 
so as the nature of the business will admit? Perhaps it might be best to have a number ot copies printed and cir- 



1816.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 117 

culated amongst them, because tlie chiefs never conclude any very important business before they find the popular 
sentiments of their people. I had omitted to mention that the Cheroliees are not half of them armed, and those arms 
they have are generally bad and wanting frequent repairs. If they remove, ihey must have one or two good 
armorers, besides the common blacksmiths; these last can be induced, without any expense to the Government, 
except by doing work expressly required by order of the agent. 

I have the honor, &c. ^ RETURN J. MEIGS. 

Hon. William H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



Sir: Nashville, November 12, 1816. 

On the 4lli ult. General Meriwether and myself advised you of the ratification of the treaty made with the 
Cherokee delegates by a full council of their nation, and that it would be forwarded by our secretary. Lieutenant 
Gadsden, as early as possible. Lieutenant Gadsden has been detained here longer than was anticipated by indis- 
position, and in preparing copies of proceedings and instructions required by the commissioners. I have detained 
him likewise that he might be the bearer of the Choctaw treaty; but I have as j'et received no intelligence from the 
commissioners treating with that nation, and am apprehensive they have encountered difficulties not anticipated. 

I forward by Lieutenant Gadsden a statement of the application, in part, of the five thousand dollars remitted on 
account of the Indian department, as also my account of necessary expenditures, and a blank to be filled with 
the amount of compensation due me as commissioner. This being extra service of the most unpleasant nature, I 
presume lam entitled to some additional emolument, though I freely declare that 1 should not have urged a claim 
had it not been for the loss sustained by the death of my horses, amounting to more than my allowance as commis- 
sioner. It is the first time I have claimed compensation, though I might have done so for the treaty held with the 
Creeks in 1814. Should it be allowed, the blank in the duplicate receipt may be filled up, and the amount of my 
whole demand may be either passed to my credit in the Accountant's office, or a draft on the Nashville Bank trans- 
mitted me. It may be necessary to state (as appears on the face of my account) that Lieutenant Gadsden's 
expenses as private secretary are included with those of my own. 

Major Wm. O. Butler, who was employed to run the experimental line from this place to Lake Pontchartrain, 
so as to ascertain the nearest practicable route for a road, returned a few days since, being compelled by indisposi- 
tion to abandon the prosecution. Nearly the whole party were seriously attacked with lever, and two of the 
soldiers, from their low state, had to be left in the nation. As Major Butler's health will not permit him to resume 
this duty, I have, agreeably to your instructions, engaged a Mr. Hugh Young with the pay and emoluments of a 
captain of infantry, with a promise (as authorized in one of your communications) that he should be nominated to 
the Senate as an assistant topographical engineer. Mr. Young has been well recommended by Major Dent, judge 
advocate of the United States army, and says to me, in a writing, that he stands well recommended in the War 
Office for appointment. He is a native of Baltimore, of good connexions, as I am informed, and possesses talents 
improved by an excellent education. I have, therefore, to request that the promise made to him may be fulfilled. 
He will set out on the duties assigned him in a day or two, and will commence where Major Butler discontinued 
his operations. Major Butler had proceeded about eighty miles to the southwest of the Tennessee, and, when com- 
pelled to discontinue his operations, must have been about twenty miles southeast of the Cotton Gin Port, on the 
Tombigbee. 

I have received several communications of late from the Ordnance Department on the subject of suitable posi- 
tions for military depots in the western country. I had the honor of addressing you on this subject last spring, 
recommending Baton Rouge as an eligible site for such purpose; and, in a subsequent communication to Colonel 
Bomford, I have pointed out those advantages. It was not contemplated, however, that any thing more than arse- 
nals for the reception of arms sufficient to supply the military stationed in the eighth department, and the militia of 
Lower Louisiana, on any sudden emergency, should be erected at that point. 

From the extent of our country, it is necessary for its defence that many minor depots should be erected, all 
dependant for supplies on some large establishment in an interior and safe position. It is injudicious to depend on 
these large depots in cases of emergency; their remote situation from the exposed portions of our country and 
vulnerable points of attack preclude the possibility of that early and efficient aid which may be necessary; 
and the delays in the transportation, which are often unavoidable, may (as experience has proven) jeopardize the 
safety of a country. With these remarks, I observe that, in addition to Baton Rouge, and other situations which 
may hereafter be occupied as minor depots, it is absolutely necessary that some large establishment should be 
formed in this southwestern country for the supply of these lesser or minor ones, with workshops attached for the 
fabrication of arms, and reparation of such as may be injured in the southern service. The situation of Pittsburg 
is too remote for these objects; the navigation from thence is often obstructed, and arms, &c. subjected to an in- 
creased and heavy charge for transportation. 

The whole southern country from Kentucky and Tennessee to Mobile has been opened by the late treaties, 
and, from a knowledge of that country, I know of no situation combining so many advantages, and so well adapted 
for a large depot well stored with all the munitions of war as the lower end of the Muscle shoals, on the Tennessee 
river. From hence the navigation to the Ohio is unobstructed at all seasons of the year, and may be performed in 
two days. The falls of the shoals may be diverted into any channels, and adapted to any machinery. Shoal creek, 
which empties into the Tennessee half a mile above this position, is literally paved with iron ore. Extensive 
saltpetre caves are now in operation up the Tennessee river; and it is reported that a well-supplied cave has 
lately been discovered on the late Chickasaw cession. Flint abounds on the Tennessee, and I need not advert to 
the facility with which lead may be obtained from the Upper Mississippi. 

The distance from the Muscle shoals to the navigable waters of the Tombigbee is but sixty miles, and from the 
Coosa eiglity. This short land portage will enable Government (should it ever become necessary) to transport 
arms, (fee. down those waters for the supply of Mobile and its dependencies. But what constitutes the chief advan- 
tage of this position is, its being at the very point where the military road contemplated to be opened must cross the 
Tennessee, and, consequently, on the very route of troops moving from the upper to the support of the lower country. 
Hence the troops may rendezvous at the depot, receive all their arms, accoutrements, &c., and transport themselves 
to the scene of action. Their services performed, and on their return march, they can re-deposite their arms received, 
to be repaired and prepared for future use. 

With great respect, &c. 

ANDREW JACKSON, Major General Com'ding. 

P. S. I have just received a communication from General Coffee, stating that they [the commissioners] have 
concluded a treaty with the Choctaws, by which they have obtained a surrender of all their lands east of the Tom- 
bigbee. 

Hon. Wm. H. Crawford, Secretary of War. 



JI3 INDIAN AFFAIRS. [No. 144. 



Sir: Department of War, May 20, 1816. 

Enclosed you will receive instructions for holding a treaty with the Choctaw nation, for the purpose of ad- 
justing the limits of the Creek cession as far as it interferes with the Choctaw boundary. You are required to adopt 
the measures necessary to convene the chiefs of that nation with the least possible delay, and to give the earliest 
information of the tjme and place of the convention to your colleagues. The President expects that you will use 
your best exertions to prepare the Cho^Jaws to make the relinquishment which is desired. Considering the nature 
of Indian title in general, and the benefit which they derive from their lands, the sum which you are authorized to 
give is deemed liberal; but when the doubtful nature of the claim of that nation to the land in question is taken into 
view, the sum may appear rather extravagant. The President is desirous of erring (if necessary to err) on the side 
of liberality to the Indians, who have been our auxiliaries in the late war; and, in the event of future wars, may be 
rendered more useful to the United States. Every effort must be used to convince them that we require nothing of 
them but what is compatible with their rights and consistent with their interests. 

The factor will be instructed to furnish you with the merchandise necessary for making presents to the princi- 
pal chiefs. A liberal and judicious distribution of these presents among the most influential chiefs may have the 
most beneficial effects upon the negotiation. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 

Col. John McKee, Choctaw Agent. 

Gentlemen: Department of War, May 20, 1816. 

The Choctaw and Chickasaw nations having set up claims to a part of the lands supposed to have been 
ceded to the United States by the treaty concluded with the Creek Indians at Fort Jackson, in the year 1814, the 
President has deemed it expedient to inquire into and decide upon their validity; or to obtain a relinquishment of 
them, for a valuable consideration, before they are surveyed and offered for sale. 

To attain this object with the least possible delay, it has been determined to appoint commissioners, who, in 
conjunction with the chiefs of the Choctaw nation, shall have authority to investigate the conflicting claims of the 
two parties, and to decide upon them definitively. Confiding in your judgment, discretion, and patriotism, the 
President has selected you for the discharge of this important trust. 

In all our transactions with the Indian tribes in amity with the United States, the appearance of force or menace 
should be sedulously avoided. Whilst the claims of the Government are distinctly presented, and asserted with 
firmness, theirs should be heard with patience and respect. 

Considering the uncertainty which is generally found in definitions of Indian boundaries, it is not surprising that 
the claims of the United States under the treaty with the Creek Indians should be contested by all the tribes whose 
hunting grounds are conterminous with the lands acquired by that treaty. The cause which produces these con- 
testations necessarily renders the testimony upon which they are to be decided vague and unsatisfactory. Under 
these circumstances, it is deemed advisable not to scrutinize with too much rigidity the evidence which shall be 
produced in support of their claim, provided that the relinquishment of their title can be obtained for a fair consid- 
eration. In fixing the sum which shall be given to them, due regard will be had to the extent of country claimed, 
and to the nature of the title which they shall establish, which, in no case, shall exceed an annuity of $6,000 for 
twenty years, and $10,000 in presents to the principal chiefs. For this sum, a full relinquishment of title to the 
lands claimed by the Choctaws Jying east of the Tonibigbee may reasonably be required of them. The posses- 
sion of the left bank of this river is so important to the United States, that their right to it under the Creek cession 
cannot be relinquished by treaty. The importance of having a natural boundary, such as the Tonibigbee river, 
from one end of their country to the other, cannot be overlooked by them. Its advantages should be explained and 
enforced upon every suitable occasion. 

If, after hearing the testimony which shall be produced, the claim of the United States to the lands on the east 
bank of that river should appear to be doubtful, and the Choctaw nation shall refuse to relinquish their title for the 
consideration which you are authorized to give them, you must terminate the negotiation without entering into any 
convention upon the subject. The claims of both parties will remain unimpaired, imtil, under more favorable aus- 
pices, the controversy shall be amicably adjusted. With a view to this adjustment, you are authorized to distribute 
such presents among their principal chiefs as, in your opinion, will tend to hasten the attainment of that object. 

Colonel McKee, one of your colleagues, will be charged with convening the chiefs of the Choctaw nation, and 
will give you timely notice of the time and place of the negotiation. 

As a compensation for your services, you will receive eight dollars a day for the time you are actually employed 
in the negotiation, and in going to and returning from the treaty, besides your necessary expenses. Your secretary 
will be allowed five dollars a day and his necessary expenses. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

WM. H. CRAWFORD. 
General John Coffee, John Rhea, Esq., and Colonel John McKee, 

Commissioners, Sfc. to treat with the Choctaw Indians. 



Sir: Choctaw Agency, July 1, 1816. 

I am making ready, and in a few days will set out for the eastern part of the nation, to prepare for the con- 
templated negotiation with the Choctaws. There is nothing to prevent the assembling of the Indians immediately, 
but the uncertainty of procuring a sufficient supply of provisions at the new factory, which, in every other respect, 
is the most proper place. As soon as I am assured of provisions, I will notify my colleagues and the Indian chiefs. 
Among the difficulties in the way of a successful negotiation, (and if we had again occasion for the services of these 
people in the field, they would, I fear, be serious,) are the following claims against the United Slates, to which I 
beg leave again to call your attention. 

1st. Claims presented in my letter of the 22d August, 1815, from Nashville. I told the claimants that 
I had made the reference to the Department of War, and entertained hopes that, if the accounts were not admitted 
in their present shape, some person would be ordered to audit and settle them. 

2d. Many of the people living on the road had furnished provisions to the Tennessee and Kentucky militia on their 
passage through the nation, taking the orders of the commanding generals on the quartermaster's department in Ten- 
nessee. Of these orders, I took on upwards of $2,000 for collection last summer. Mr. Lewis, the quartermaster, had 
resigned before I got to Nashville, and payments were suspended till a successor could be appointed. I left the drafts 
in the hands of Mr. Soramerville, who writes me, on the 19th May, " they [the drafts] must be sent to the city of 
Washington for examination." This arrangement will subject these illiterate people to loss and vexation; ignorant 



181G.] TREATIES WITH THIRTEEN TRIBES. 119 

as they are, how, at this late hour, are they to obtain payment for provisions so long ago sold to a Government in 
which they had the most implicit confidencel 

3d. Pay due to the warriors who have been in the service of the United States. In some cases, muster-rolls 
have been made out and transmitted to the Department; in other cases, they never were 